Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
Unclassified

English - Or. English
27 May 2025

Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs
COMPETITION COMMITTEE

Annual Report on Competition Policy Developments in Norway
-- 2024 --

This report is submitted by Norway to the Competition Committee FOR INFORMATION.

JT03567175
OFDE

This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the
delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

2  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28

Table of contents
Norway ................................................................................................................................................................... 3
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................................... 3
1.1. Summary of new legal provisions of competition law and related legislation ............................................. 4
1.2. Other relevant measures, including new guidelines ..................................................................................... 5
1.3. Government proposals for new legislation ................................................................................................... 5
2. Enforcement of competition legislation/rules and policies ............................................................................. 6
2.1. Action against anticompetitive practices, including agreements and abuse of dominant position ............... 6
2.2. Mergers and acquisitions .............................................................................................................................. 9
3. Proposals for regulatory reforms, trade- and industrial policies etc. ......................................................... 13
3.1. Cooperating bodies ..................................................................................................................................... 13
3.2. International cooperation ............................................................................................................................ 13
3.3. Expressing competition concerns related to existing or proposed regulations ........................................... 14
4. Resources of the competition authority ......................................................................................................... 15
4.1. Resources overall ....................................................................................................................................... 15
4.2. Human resources (person-years) applied to mergers, anti-cartels, dominance-related issues and
advocacy ............................................................................................................................................................ 15
4.3. Organisational development ....................................................................................................................... 15
5. Summaries of or references to new reports and studies on competition policy issues............................... 16
Margin study 2024 – Part 1 ............................................................................................................................... 16
Margin study 2024 – Part 2 ............................................................................................................................... 16
Joint Nordic report 2024: Competition and labour markets .............................................................................. 17
Studies on competition policy issues ................................................................................................................. 17

FIGURES
Figure 2.1. Notifications of mergers and acquisitions – January 2019 – December 2024 (3 months running average)

11

TABLES
Table 2.1. Investigative Work Activities 2014-2024

7

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  3

Norway
Executive summary
1.
The goal of competition policy in Norway is to promote competition and efficient
use of society's resources, thus stimulating productivity and innovation to the benefit of
consumers and businesses. An integral part of this policy is to ensure that markets function
well, allowing businesses to compete on equal terms and offer better products and services.
Ultimately, this contributes to increased value creation and sustainable use of resources.
2.
Several important legal and policy developments occurred in 2024. To ensure a
modern and future-proof competition policy, the Government appointed an expert
committee in September 2024 to conduct a comprehensive review of the Competition Act.
The review will consider developments in EU/EEA competition law, sustainability,
digitalisation and national security. The committee is expected to deliver its report 1.
December 2025.
3.
A regulation prohibiting the use of restrictive covenants that prevent the
establishment of grocery stores came into effect on 1 January 2024. The regulation applies
to new covenants from that date and is intended to reduce barriers to entry by addressing
the grocery chains' use of legal restrictions on competing retail activity.
4.
In December 2024, the Norwegian Parliament adopted an amendment to the
Competition Act granting the Norwegian Competition Authority (NCA hereafter) a new
enforcement tool – market investigation – which will be used to improve competition and
increase consumer welfare. The new provisions will enter into force 1 July 2025. Currently,
the NCA can only intervene in cases involving a breach of the Competition Act. Market
investigation changes this by allowing the Authority, following a thorough investigation,
to adopt behavioural or structural remedies to strengthen competition if serious competition
problems are identified.
5.
The NCA enforces the Competition Act and supervises competition in various
markets. Important tasks for the NCA in this regard are effective enforcement of the
prohibitions against anti-competitive agreements and abuse of dominant position in the
Competition Act, merger control and active advocacy work. The NCA also endeavours to
be a centre of competence in competition-related matters.
6.
In its work to control and assess concentrations, the NCA carefully reviews mergers
and acquisitions that might impede effective competition. In 2024, the Authority received
and assessed 151 merger notifications, of which 97 percent were cleared within 25 working
days.
7.
Some of the more important merger cases, potential abuse of dominance and cartel
cases are mentioned in this report.
8.
The grocery sector in Norway has a high degree of concentration in most parts of
the value chain. This sector has therefore been a priority for the Norwegian Government
and the NCA for several years. The Government has implemented several measures, and is
considering additional ones, to strengthen competition in this sector. Examples are
assessments of private labels and the supply of wholesale and distribution services. The
NCA's activities include enforcement, market analyses, and various forms of advocacy to
strengthen competition in the grocery sector.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

4  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
9.
Notably, in August, the NCA concluded the so-called ‘price hunter case’ by
imposing a total of NOK 4.9 billion (USD 462 million)1 in fines on the three largest grocery
chains in Norway, NorgesGruppen, Coop and Rema 1000 for breaching the Competition
Act. The Authority found evidence that the grocery chains' cooperation on extensive price
monitoring in each other's stores was illegal.
10.
As part of its broader efforts to promote competition in the grocery sector, the
Government tasked the NCA in 2023 with analysing purchasing prices, gross and operating
margins, and profitability across the sector’s industry-, wholesale- and retail level. The
analysis, presented in June 2024, showed a continued narrowing of differences in
purchasing prices. The findings revealed no evidence that grocery retailers had exploited
the COVID-19 pandemic or the war in Ukraine to increase prices. However, the analysis
did indicate that profitability remains higher than would be expected in a market
characterized by strong competition.
11.
The NCA's Grocery Report for 2023 provides a broader assessment of the
competitive situation in the market. The report, which was presented in early 2024,
attracted significant media attention. Among other things, it evaluates the grocery chains'
store establishment strategies and the degree of local competition.
12.
By the end of 2024, the NCA had a total of 99 employees, including staff on
temporary leave.
13.
In February 2025, Gjermund Nese was appointed Acting Director General of the
NCA.

1.1. Summary of new legal provisions of competition law and related legislation
14.
Market investigation. In December 2024, the Norwegian Parliament adopted
legislative amendments establishing a legal framework for market investigations in the
Competition Act. The new provisions, which will enter into force on 1 July 2025, will give
the NCA a new legal instrument to address serious competition concerns, even in the
absence of an infringement of competition law. The new instrument draws inspiration from
corresponding frameworks in the UK and Iceland, and it supplements the existing
enforcement instruments in the Norwegian Competition Act. It is intended to address
broader market dysfunctions, not just focusing on anti-competitive behaviour by individual
companies.
15.
The new provisions will enable the NCA to initiate a market investigation if there
are indications that competition within a market is, or is at risk of, being significantly
restricted. A draft decision to conduct a market investigation shall be subject to a public
hearing before a final opening decision may be adopted by the NCA. Following a thorough
analysis of the competitive conditions in the market in question the NCA may, if it finds
that the competition is significantly restricted or at risk of being significantly restricted,
impose any behavioural or structural remedies considered necessary to eliminate or
mitigate the restrictions. Any measures must be proportionate and not go further than
necessary.
16.
Market investigations can be used in any sector. There are, however, extensive
exemptions applicable to the agriculture and fisheries sectors, analogous to those
established for the prohibitions on anti-competitive agreements and the abuse of a dominant
position.

1

The exchange rate in this document is per 19. March 2025.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  5

17.
A decision made by the NCA imposing remedies in conclusion of a market
investigation can be challenged before the Norwegian Competition Tribunal.
18.
Interest on administrative fines. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries
adopted a regulation on the accrual of interest on administrative fines for infringements of
the Competition Act. The regulation supplements Section 29 (5) of the Act, and applies
retroactively from 1 January 2023. The regulation aims to strengthen the effectiveness of
the Act by incentivising undertaking to pay fines on time. It also ensures more equal
treatment between undertakings and the state by entitling undertaking to interest payments
in cases where an imposed fine is later reduced or annulled following an appeal or court
decision. The regulation is aligned with similar rules under EU/EEA. A new regulation
which clarifies the rules related calculation and payment of interest was adopted in
November 2024, and retroactively entered into force January 2023. The regulation clarified
the Government’s obligation to repay collected fines to the undertakings with interest if the
fine is reduced or repealed after payment is made.

1.2. Other relevant measures, including new guidelines
19.
Regulation on prohibition of the use of restrictive covenants that limit the
establishment of grocery businesses. In January 2024 a new regulation came into force
that applies to the establishment of new restrictive covenants from that date and does not
cover covenants already in place prior to the regulation's entry into force. The regulation is
primarily intended to cover covenants that restrict the establishment of grocery operations
on properties owned by others. Such rights are typically established through leasing
agreements or purchase.
20.
In 2024, the NCA conducted new analysis to map the extent of restrictive covenants
used by the grocery chains. It included the covenants established by companies that directly
or indirectly control, or are controlled by, NorgesGruppen, Rema, Coop and Bunnpris. The
investigations revealed that the market players held restrictive covenants established before
the regulation took effect, and that there were some plans to remove them. Some actors had
already started the process of removing the covenants after being called out by the NCA.
Furthermore, the investigation found that several partners of the grocery chains have
imposed restrictive covenants in favour of the grocery chains. As access to suitable
premises constitutes a significant barrier to entry in the grocery market, the NCA will
continue its efforts to gain a better overview of the chains' control over properties that may
be used for grocery shops.
21.

No new guidelines were introduced in 2024.

1.3. Government proposals for new legislation
22.
Expert committee to review and modernise the Competition Act. In September
2024, the Government appointed an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive review
and modernisation of the Competition Act, which has been in force since 2004 and was last
the object of an extensive review more than a decade ago. The aim of the review is to ensure
that the competition legislation remains an effective instrument, and is aligned with broader
developments in case law, EU/EEA competition policy, and societal and market trends.
23.
The committee has been tasked with undertaking a holistic revision of the legal
framework to reflect significant economic and structural changes, particularly those driven
by digitalisation, which has led to more complex and wide-ranging competition cases.
Other key issues that will be assessed include:

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

6  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
•

Review the objective of the Competition Act in light of developments in national
and EU/EEA competition policy

•

Potential amendments to the merger control regime, including whether rules to
safeguard specific societal interests such as national security, geopolitical
considerations and sustainability should be enacted

•

The functioning of the Competition Appeals Tribunal and the broader appeals
system

•

Potential improvements to procedural rules and amendments to the sanctions for
breach of the Act

•

Potential amendments to section 14 of the Act, which gives the Government
authority to adopt regulations restricting anti-competitive terms, agreements and
conduct

24.
The committee is led by Kristin Hjelmaas Valla, partner in the law firm Kvale, and
is composed of legal and economic experts from both academia and private practice. One
member has been nominated by each of the following: the NCA, the Confederation of
Norwegian Enterprise (NHO), and the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions (LO).
The committee will deliver its recommendations in an Official Report (NOU) to the
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries by December 2025.

2. Enforcement of competition legislation/rules and policies
25.
According to the Competition Act, the primary responsibilities of the NCA are as
follows:
•

Monitor adherence by businesses and industry to the Competition Act’s
prohibitions against anti-competitive cooperation and abuse of a dominant position

•

Ensure that mergers, acquisitions, and other forms of concentrations do not
significantly restrict competition

•

Implement measures to increase the transparency of markets

•

Enforce Articles 53 and 54 of the EEA Agreement

•

Call attention to any restrictive effects on competition of public measures and,
where appropriate, submit proposals to the relevant public authorities aimed at
promoting competition and facilitating market access by new competitors

26.
The NCA may impose civil sanctions in the form of administrative fines on
undertakings that infringe the competition rules. In addition, the Competition Act includes
provisions on penalties for individuals. However, no individuals have been penalised
pursuant to the Competition Act as of 2004.

2.1. Action against anticompetitive practices, including agreements and abuse of
dominant position
2.1.1. Summary of activities
27.
The Authority endeavours to work broadly, with various types of cases in a diverse
range of markets of importance to the Norwegian consumers.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  7

28.
Tip-offs, complaints, and leniency applications are important to ensure the greatest
possible direct and indirect effects of enforcement. Through targeted informational
measures, the NCA has experienced an increase in tip-offs related to possible infringement
of the Competition Act.
29.
Moreover, the NCA has adopted a more proactive approach to uncovering cartels.
Several projects on uncovering cartels ex officio have been initiated since 2017. In addition,
the NCA aims at utilizing the possibilities that digital tools provide, using new sources and
methods for data analysis for the detection of cartels.
30.

A summary of activities is presented below.

Table 2.1. Investigative Work Activities 2014-2024
Cases / locations

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

Securing evidence, cf. section 25 of the
Competition Act

1/2

1/3

3/3

2/10

2/6

1/2

2/8

3/112

0

1/4

Depositions (formal statements),
cf. section 24 of the Competition Act

5/45

4/17

4/20

4/34

6/39

3/6

0

1/5

4/14

1/2

31.
The Norwegian Competition Act has had provisions on leniency since 2004. The
threshold for seeking leniency appears to be relatively low, and some of the NCA's larger
cases were instigated by leniency applications. However, surveys in previous years have
indicated a lack of knowledge about- the possibility to apply for leniency among business
leaders in Norway. To address this, the NCA has intensified its communication efforts
through media channels regarding the leniency programme and the possibility for
anonymous tip-offs.
32.
In 2024, the NCA received 33 tip-offs concerning competition-restricting public
measures which were subject to further examination. These tip-offs s contributed to the
NCA’s ability to carry out the tasks under Section 9 e of the Competition Act, which
involves pointing out competition-restricting effects of public measures. If required by the
NCA, the body responsible for the measure shall respond to the NCA within a specified
deadline. The response shall, among other things, explain how competitive considerations
will be addressed.
33.
Additionally, the NCA received 455 tip-offs concerning possible infringements of
Sections 10 and 11 of the Competition Act, which address illegal cooperation between
undertakings and abuse of a dominant position, respectively.
34.
To further evaluate the follow-up of received tip-offs, an internal tip-off group has
been established with participants from the NCAs three market departments.

2.1.2. Description of significant cases, including those with international
implications
35.
Market for driving training. In November 2024, the NCA carried out
unannounced inspections at several driving schools based on a suspicion of illegal
collaboration in violation of Section 10 of the Competition Act. The inspections aimed to
2

The number is different from the previous annual report because evidence collection in one case
was counted twice.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

8  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
confirm or reject this suspicion. The district court approved the NCAs petition to collect
evidence (dawn raid), and relevant material was seized for further examination.
36.
Market for relocation services. In September 2021, the NCA started an
investigation among undertakings in the market for relocation services. In April 2024, the
NCA issued a statement of objections in the case.
37.
Market for financial services. In February 2022, the NCA carried out
unannounced inspections (dawn raid) at KLP due to suspicion of a violation of Section 11
of the Competition Act, which pertains to abuse of a dominant position in the market. KLP
plays a crucial role in providing pensions for over 900 000 Norwegian consumers in the
public sector. The company's total managed assets range between NOK 700 billion and 1
trillion (66 billion to 94 billion USD), depending on the time period. The suspicion relates
to KLP’s possible anticompetitive conduct in the market for occupational pensions.
Relevant materials were seized to confirm or reject the suspicion of a breach of the
prohibition against abuse of dominant position in section 11 of the Competition Act. The
investigation is ongoing.
38.
As part of the case, the NCA has sought legal clarification of the scope of legal
privilege under the Competition Act for documents prepared by in-house lawyers. The case
is scheduled to be heard by the Court of Appeal in late April 2025.
39.
Health-related market. In May 2021, the NCA initiated an investigation, and
conducted a dawn-raid at the facilities of the undertakings involved. The investigation was
based on suspicion relating to illegal exchange of competition-sensitive information
between the parties, in violation of Section 10 of the Competition Act. After thorough
investigation, the NCA did not find sufficient grounds to take the case further and decided
to close the investigation in June 2024. However, the Authority will continue to monitor
the market closely, as it consists of a limited number of players with strong positions across
multiple levels of the value chain.
40.
‘Price hunters’ in the grocery market. The NCA has prioritised monitoring
competition in the grocery market for many years. The market is highly concentrated both
at the wholesale and retail level. Competition challenges in this market have a significant
impact on Norwegian consumers, as it is crucial to avoid unnecessary price increases. In
2023, the NCA continued its investigations in the grocery market, assessing the substantial
materials seized in a dawn raid conducted in 2018. The core of the case relates to an
agreement between the grocery chains, which allowed them to access each other’s stores
to collect shelf price information for use in comparative advertising. The NCA learned that
each chain had developed an organisation of ‘price hunters’ to collect prices from
competing grocery stores.
41.
Following increased activity of ‘price hunting’, the NCA examined the grocery
chains’ pricing and information flows in 2016, including the practice of collecting price
information from competing stores. That examination led the Authority to conduct
unannounced inspections at NorgesGruppen, Coop, Rema 1000 and Bunnpris’ premises in
2018 on the suspicion of exchange of strategic information between these grocery chains.
After further investigation, the NCA decided not to proceed with the case against Bunnpris.
42.
In December 2020, the NCA issued a statement of objections stating that it
considered imposing fines totalling NOK 21 billion (USD 1.9 billion) on NorgesGruppen,
Coop and Rema 1000. The NCA suspected that the grocery chains violated the prohibition
against anti-competitive cooperation. The preliminary assessments indicated that the
grocery chains had cooperated in a manner that may have led to higher grocery prices for
Norwegian consumers. The parties submitted their responses in late February 2022.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  9

43.
In February 2024, the NCA dropped the accusation that the price hunter activities
constituted a restriction of competition by object. However, the NCA continued
investigating whether the collaboration restricted competition by effect – a less serious
offence.
44.
In August 2024, the NCA concluded that the collaboration between the
NorgesGruppen, Coop and Rema 1000 constituted an infringement of the Competition Act
and imposed fines totalling NOK 4.9 billion (USD 462 million). The investigation found
that the grocery chains' cooperation in allowing extensive price-tracking activities in each
other's store harmed competition by increasing price transparency between competitors
without providing benefits to consumers.
45.
The alleged illegal cooperation lasted from January 2011 until at least April 2018,
when the NCA conducted dawn raids at the grocery chains' offices. During this period,
price-tracking activities intensified, allowing the chains to track competitors prices multiple
times per day. The investigation found that this practice contributed to reduced price
competition, as grocery chains could anticipate competitors' price reactions, making price
increases more attractive and price reductions less effective.
46.
The following fines were imposed: i) NorgesGruppen NOK 2.3 billion (USD 216.2
million), ii) Coop NOK 1.3 billion (USD 122.2 million), iii) Rema 1000 1.3 billion (USD
122.2 million).
47.
The grocery chains were also ordered to cease cooperation and any similar practices
with equivalent effects.
48.

The NCA decision has been appealed to the Competition Appeal Tribunal.

2.1.3. Summary of development in cases that were appealed
49.
The NCA's decisions to impose administrative fines can be appealed to the
Competition Appeal Tribunal. The Tribunal shall consider appeals against all decisions
pursuant to the Competition Act, i.a. rulings in merger cases, fines for abuse of dominance
and collusive behaviour, as well as decisions relating to access to file and duty to provide
information. Decisions by the Competition Tribunal may be appealed to the designated
appeals court, Gulating Appeals Court, and ultimately to the Supreme Court.
50.
A legislative amendment which entered into force in July 2023 grants the NCA the
right to appeal decisions by the Tribunal in cases regarding anti-competitive collusion
(section 10), abuse of dominant position (section 11), obligation to cease anti-competitive
conduct (section 12), regulations adopted by the Government pursuant (section 14) and
article 53 and 54 of the EEA agreement, cf. section 39 nr. 6. The NCA did not appeal any
cases in 2024. The NCA cannot appeal the Tribunal’s decisions in merger cases.

2.2. Mergers and acquisitions
51.
An important task for the NCA is to assess and prohibit concentrations that will
significantly impede effective competition. To fulfil this task, the NCA has been equipped
with three different tools: i) the general notification rules for transactions exceeding the
thresholds, ii) the extended duty to provide information regarding transactions and iii) the
power to impose notification requirements on any transactions or minority acquisitions
(call-in option).
52.
The first tool is the most important in merger control, according to which the
acquirer of control or merging parties have a duty to notify the NCA about any
concentrations, such as mergers, acquisitions, agreements and full-functioning joint

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

10  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
ventures by which they acquire control of other undertakings, if the combined annual
turnover of the undertakings concerned exceeds NOK 1 billion (USD 94 million) in
Norway.
53.
The NCA can impose an extended disclosure requirement on certain undertakings
in sectors and industries that are characterised by structural issues and a high degree of
concentration. The requirement entails that the undertaking is required to inform the NCA
when they acquire control of or merge with another undertaking operating in specified
markets or industries, even if the notification thresholds are not exceeded. For some
undertakings, the disclosure requirements also cover acquisition of minority shareholdings.
A breach of the requirement can be sanctioned with an administrative fine. The NCA may
use the call-in option to impose a duty to file a merger notification if it finds that the
transaction should be further examined.
54.
The NCA also has the authority to impose a duty to notify any concentration or a
minority acquisition, if it has reason to suspect that the transaction will impact competition
or if other factors indicate that the Authority should examine the case more closely (callin). The NCA must use the call-in option within a deadline of three months from the
conclusion of the transaction agreement or acquisition of control. This tool is particularly
relevant when analysing established firms that acquire start-ups and in preventing killer
acquisitions.
55.
If the transaction exceeds the notification thresholds or the NCA has imposed a
duty to notify, it is subject to a stand-still obligation until clearance, and the NCA may
sanction illegal implementation with an administrative fine.
56.
In addition to assessing notified mergers, the NCA monitors mergers that
previously have been approved with remedies. In most of these cases, a monitoring trustee,
appointed by the NCA, ensures that the conditions are met.

2.2.1. Statistics on number, size and type of mergers notified and/or assessed
under competition law
57.
In 2024, the NCA received 151 notifications, compared to 113 in 2023. Notably,
73 percent of the notifications (111) are so-called simplified notifications, relating to
concentrations that are not likely to affect competition negatively.
58.
In 2021 and 2022, the NCA received a record number of merger notifications. A
plausible explanation for this increase may be that many firms had a difficult time during
the pandemic. In 2023, however, the number dropped back to pre-pandemic levels. In 2024
the number of notifications rose again, likely driven by increased economic uncertainty and
market adjustments.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  11

Figure 2.1. Notifications of mergers and acquisitions – January 2019 – December 2024 (3 months
running average)

59.
The NCA aims at managing merger cases efficiently and provide businesses with a
speedy resolution. By focusing on front-loading resources in each case, the NCA has been
able to handle cases more efficiently, freeing up internal resources for other prioritized
cases.
60.
Of the 151 notifications of mergers and acquisitions received by the NCA in 2024,
147 were closed within 25 working days, i.e. 97,3 percent. For the NCA, thorough control
of concentrations is an important part of its work. Notwithstanding, efficient clearance has
proved to be beneficial for the involved parties and contributed to increased predictability
and swiftness in the merger control.3

2.2.2. Summary of significant cases
61.
The NCA has the power to require businesses in highly concentrated markets, such
as power production and the grocery market, to inform the Authority of all acquisitions. By
monitoring these markets closely, the NCA can stay informed of new developments and
potential competition issues. The NCA periodically evaluates whether such obligations
should be imposed on additional market participants. For more information on this subject,
see subsection 1.2 and the introduction of subsection 2.2.
62.
In April 2024, the NCA assessed the merger between TGS Newco and PGS, two
companies operating in in the market for geophysical services, with a primary focus on
seismic data. After issuing a statement of potential intervention and conducting a thorough
analysis, the NCA concluded that the merger would not impede effective competition. The
case was therefore closed.
63.
In September 2024, the NCA prohibited Norva24 Vest's acquisition of Vitek
Miljø. In August, the NCA issued a notice stating that intervention could be necessary. The
decision was based on concerns that the merger would significantly weaken competition in
3

As the NCA receive notifications throughout the year, sometimes there is an overlap over
the years when the cases are registered in our systems.
ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

12  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
the market for emptying and flushing services in the former Hordaland region. The two
companies are already the largest providers of these services in the area and are each other's
closest competitors. The acquisition would have led to increased market concentration,
reducing competitive pressure, which could have resulted in higher prices and lower service
quality for private, public and business customers. In January 2025, the Competition
Appeals Board upheld the NCA's decision to prohibit the merger.
64.
In November 2024, Saferoad withdrew its merger notification for the
acquisition of Ze Bra Holding. Both companies operate in the market for road marking.
The NCA had issued a notice indicating that intervention could be necessary, as the
acquisition could reduce the number of competitors in the market. Saferoad is already the
largest player in the market, and the merger could have negatively impacted prices and
conditions for the customers. Following these concerns, Saferoad chose to withdraw its
notification.

2.2.3. Extended disclosure agreements
65.
The aim of the disclosure requirements mentioned in section 2.2 is to prevent
acquisitions by large companies of smaller market players that harm competition.
66.
In 2024, the NCA imposed disclosure requirements for some new markets and
undertakings. Currently, the following markets and undertakings are subject to extended
disclosure requirements:
•

Motor fuel retailing: Uno-X Mobility, St1 Norge AS, Certas Energy Norway AS,
Circle K Norge AS, YX Norge AS

•

Electricity generation: Statkraft AS, Eviny AS, Skagerak Energi AS, Å Energi AS
and Hafslund Kraft AS

•

Waste management and recycling: Norsk Gjenvinning Norge AS

•

Grocery store chains: Norgesgruppen ASA, Coop Norge SA, Rema 1000 and
Bunnpris IK Lykke AS

•

Newspapers: Amedia AS, Polaris Media ASA and Schibsted ASA

•

Home security systems: Verisure AS and Sector Alarm Group AS

•

Laundry services: Nor Tekstil AS

•

Garden centres: Plantasjen Norge ASA

•

Suppliers of concrete: Nordic Concrete Group AS, Heidelberg Materials Norway
AS and Unicon AS

•

Accounting systems: Visma AS

•

Online marketplaces: Schibsted ASA

•

Charging services for electric cars: Mer Norway AS, Circle K Norge AS, Eviny
Elektrifisering AS, Recharge AS and Tesla Norway AS

•

Sport equipment: Sport Holding AS

67.
The NCA regularly considers whether it is necessary to impose disclosure
requirements on other market players.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  13

3. Proposals for regulatory reforms, trade- and industrial policies etc.
3.1. Cooperating bodies
68.
The NCA holds regular meetings for information and contact purposes with sector
regulators such as the Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway, the Norwegian
Communications Authority, the Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate, the
Norwegian Consumer Authority, and the Norwegian Consumer Council. The contact with
some of these bodies is formalised by cooperation agreements which provide a better
framework to exchange information. Meetings are both on regular and ad hoc basis,
depending on whether there are cases where both competition policy and sector-based
regulations are essential. Moreover, the NCA has continued to maintain good relations with
other public institutions throughout 2024.

3.2. International cooperation
69.
The NCA prioritizes international cooperation, with the European Competition
Network (ECN), Nordic network, the International Competition Network (ICN) and the
OECD as the most important networks. The NCA aims to be an active contributor to these
networks, submits written contributions for the OECD Competition Committee and
presents cases in ECN Working Groups.
70.
The Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA) makes Norway an integral
part of the European single market. The EEA links the EU member states and three of the
member states of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) (Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway) into an internal market governed by the same basic rules. Thus, the agreement
entails the free movement of goods, services, capital and persons. The agreement also
entails common rules for competition, public procurement and state aid, in order to ensure
equal and fair conditions of competition between companies throughout the EEA. As a
result of the single market, many cases concerning anti-competitive conduct include
companies that operate across borders, affecting consumers in many countries. Thus, active
participation in the ECN is particularly important to Norway and the NCA.
71.
In its enforcement of the EEA competition rules, the NCA has regular contact with
the EFTA Surveillance Authority (ESA) concerning ongoing cases with a cross-border
dimension, to ensure consistent application and enforcement of article 53 and 54 of the
EEA Agreement (corresponding to TFEU article 101 and 102). In 2021, ESA launched the
EFTA Competition Network. The network has also been active with webinars, capacity
building seminars and physical meetings on policy-oriented issues in 2024.
72.
Another important cooperation arena is the Nordic cooperation, which is
formalized in an agreement between the Nordic Competition Authorities and facilitates
effective cooperation on cross-border enforcement. The cooperation also comprises
informal contact through various networks, a biannual meeting between the DGs and an
annual meeting focusing on topical enforcement related issues. In 2024, the annual Nordic
meeting between the competition authorities took place in Turku, Finland.
73.
In 2024 and 2025 the NCA cooperated with the other Nordic competition
authorities in organizing two webinar series, each consisting of four webinars, covering
issues decided by the Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine (AMCU).
74.
The NCA is an active participant in the ICN. From 2021 till 2024 the NCA was a
co-chair of the ICN Merger Working Group, after having served as a co-chair for its
Advocacy Working Group.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

14  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
75.
In addition, the NCA also has informal cooperation with other authorities on a
bilateral basis.

3.3. Expressing competition concerns related to existing or proposed regulations
76.
According to section 9 of the Competition Act, the NCA shall supervise
competition in all markets, by implementing measures to promote market transparency,
and by calling attention to any restrictive effects on competition caused by public measures.
77.
In this regard, the NCA advocates for changes in regulations in order to facilitate
competition through lower entry barriers, new business models, and stronger incentives to
compete.
78.
Anti-competitive regulations exist in a number of different areas, and the NCA has
taken steps to address them. One of these steps is to include a a function on the NCA's
website that allows the general public to submit encrypted submissions regarding perceived
regulatory restrictions on competition. The tip-offs are first reviewed by an internal taskforce, and then considered for prioritisation by the relevant market department.
79.
Further, it is a key part of the NCA’s advocacy efforts to raise awareness of the
importance of competition and to influence a competitive culture across markets. The
NCA's advocacy efforts are particularly directed towards small and medium sized
enterprises, as surveys have documented a clear need for increased awareness of and
familiarity with competition law.
80.
In 2024, the NCA has been active in its advocacy work and received significant
media attention. The Authority continues to be active in the media, explaining the
importance of effective enforcement of the competition legislation and its direct impact on
consumers. In addition to TV appearances and interviews, the NCA’s employees published
11 op-eds on topical issues. Additionally, the NCA released 1 podcast episode and
produced 4 webcasts presenting basic knowledge on competition law. These webcasts are
particularly relevant for small and medium-sized enterprises.
81.
Notably, media analytics and a survey indicate that the NCA has been highly visible
in 2024 with 4652 media news items referencing the NCA.
82.
As a consultative body in public hearings, the NCA assess if the impact on
competition is considered appropriately when new policies are proposed. The Authority
prioritises consultations where its influence is most likely to result in a positive outcome
for competition. This approach has proven to be effective use of resources. In 2024, the
NCA submitted 12 hearing statements to various ministries and authorities regarding
proposed legal amendments on a broad range of topics.
83.
The Authority has continued to develop separate thematic webpages about
prioritized markets or markets in which the Authority has additional tasks. The NCA had
developed such thematic webpages for the taxi market, the fuels market, the digital
economy, sustainable development and competition, and the grocery market.

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  15

4. Resources of the competition authority
4.1. Resources overall
4.1.1. Annual budget
84.
The annual budget for the NCA for 2024 was NOK 142.9 million (USD 13.4
million).

4.1.2. Number of employees (person-years):
85.
In 2024, the NCA's personnel resources amounted to 87.4 person-years, including
administrative staff and PR-staff.
86.
Number of employees (not person-years) as per 31 December 2024 amounted to 99
(including staff on temporary leave), including:
•

36 economists

•

34 lawyers

•

3 investigators

•

1 data scientist

•

23 other professionals and support staff (HR, IT and information management,
PR/communications, finance, organisation development)

4.2. Human resources (person-years) applied to mergers, anti-cartels, dominancerelated issues and advocacy
87.
The NCA's case handling is primarily organised around sectors of the economy,
with case handlers working in market departments responsible for specific markets. All
case handlers work on different types of competition cases within their allocated market
department.
88.
Specialised legal and economic support along with quality assurance, is provided
by the legal director's team and the chief economist's team, respectively.
89.
All case handlers may engage in advocacy work. The Department of
Communications and PR works closely with other departments to maximize media
outreach related to case outcomes and advocacy work.
90.
Skill development is a priority for all employees, with the NCA successfully
building a staff of highly qualified and experienced case handlers. A key focus in 2024 has
been competence development, particularly in leadership at different levels within the
organisation and project management.

4.3. Organisational development
91.
In 2024, the NCA implemented an organisational restructuring to strengthen
competition law enforcement. The investigative department was dissolved, and
investigative staff were fully integrated into the market departments. Each market
department now has its own dedicated investigation team, ensuring a more comprehensive
approach to case handling from case initiation to decision.
92.
The restructuring aims to create a more holistic investigation process, with
investigators working more closely with case handlers throughout the case lifecycle. The
ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

16  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
investigative teams continue to focus on cartel and abuse of dominance cases, as well as
international network activities. Additionally, the staff retains specialist knowledge in
forensic IT. Developing and integrating investigative expertise across the organisation
remains a key priority in 2025, with the full effects of the restructuring expected to be
measurable over time.
93.
Moreover, the NCA established a new unit for data and analysis to enhance digital
capabilities. The unit is responsible for managing the machine learning platform and
contributing to advanced analyses of both internal and external data. It plays a central role
in driving digital transformation, handling large data volumes, and developing visualisation
tools.
94.
The continued development of digital expertise will remain a key priority in 2025.
This unit will also be responsible for large-scale projects that require specialised digital
expertise.

5. Summaries of or references to new reports and studies on competition policy issues
Margin study 2024 – Part 14
95.
In May 2024, the NCA published the first part of the margin study, mandated by
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries to enhance insight into profitability and
competition dynamics in the grocery sector. The study examines the profitability of
selected suppliers and the three largest grocery chains – NorgesGruppen, Rema 1000 and
Coop – which operate at both the wholesale- and retail level – over the period 2017 to 2022.
96.
The study is based on financial data from a range of suppliers across different
product markets, as well as the three largest grocery chains. The NCA calculated gross
margins, operating margins, and return on net operating assets to assess profitability trends
in the grocery sector.
97.
The study finds no clear evidence that grocery chains or suppliers exploited external
crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic or the war in Ukraine to increase prices or boost
profits. While groceries prices rose by 8.9 percent between December 2021 and December
2022, the study shows that operating margins and returns on capital declined in 2022,
returning to pre-pandemic levels.
98.
However, the study reveals consistently high profitability across the grocery value
chain, exceeding what would typically be expected in a market characterised by intense
competition and low barriers to entry. These results are consistent with previous
assessments done by the NCA, which have pointed to limited competition in the Norwegian
grocery market due to high market concentration and significant structural barriers.

Margin study 2024 – Part 25
99.
In January 2025, the NCA published the second part of the margin study, mandated
by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries as part of ongoing efforts to assess
competition in the grocery sector. The study analyses margins on product-level of selected
market participants in the grocery value chain over the period 2020 to the first half of 2023.
4

https://konkurransetilsynet.no/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/Rapport-marginstudie.pdf

5

https://konkurransetilsynet.no/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/Del-2.-Kartlegging-av-marginer-vedbruk-av-informasjon-pa-produktniva.pdf

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28  17

The same information was obtained for the grocery chains' private label products. The study
is based on data from branded and private label suppliers, as well as from the same grocery
chains as in Part 1 of the study. This study presents gross margins and contribution margins
for suppliers and gross margins for grocery chains, offering a more granular perspective of
pricing and profitability than Part 1 of the study.
100. The study finds substantial variation in profitability across product categories, with
some segments, such as snacks and confectionery showing high margins, while others –
particularly meat and seafood private label products showed low or even negative margins.
The NCA also finds that on average the grocery chains achieved 12 percent lower margins
on private label products compared to branded ones.
101. While the COVID-19 pandemic initially led to increased sales volumes and
revenues, the report found that profit margins remained stable. After 2022, the input costs
and prices increased, volumes declined, and supplier margins decreased, while retail
margins remained largely unchanged. The results from this study support the conclusions
of the previous part and provide additional evidence for assessing structural conditions and
potential barriers to effective competition in the grocery sector.

Joint Nordic report 2024: Competition and labour markets6
102. In April 2024, the Nordic competition authorities published a joint report on
competition in labour markets. The report examines how agreements between firms such
as no-poach agreements and wage-fixing agreements may harm both workers and
consumers and constitute infringements of competition law.
103. The report found that such agreements can reduce the labour mobility and
bargaining power for employees, distort efficient resource allocation, and in turn reduce
competition in the downstream markets. While collective bargaining agreements
negotiated by trade unions are exempt from competition law in the Nordic countries, the
report focuses on agreements that fall outside these exemptions.
104. The report draws on economic theory, legal frameworks and enforcement of
competition law related to labour markets and includes a survey of Norwegian companies
indicating that no-poach agreements are not uncommon in parts of the Norwegian labour
market. It also outlines recent enforcement actions taken by Nordic and European
authorities against anti-competitive conduct in labour markets and calls for increased
awareness and enforcement in this area.

Studies on competition policy issues
105. Since 2014, the NCA has administered a research funding scheme in the fields of
competition economics and competition law. These funds are allocated through the national
budget proposed by the government, and adopted by the Parliament The research grant is
open for applicants from all institutional backgrounds. The aim of the grant program is to
encourage and support research that contributes to the development of effective
competition policy and enforcement in Norway, and to enhance the competitiveness of
Norwegian firms in the global market. The NCA continues to disseminate findings through
its website, academic journals and both internal and external seminars

6

https://konkurransetilsynet.no/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/Competition-and-Labour-marketsJoint-Nordic-report-2024.pdf

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

18  DAF/COMP/AR(2025)28
106. This funding has contributed to strengthening Norwegian academic capacity in
these disciplines and has generated valuable insights for the enforcement and policy work.
Since 2022, research funding has been allocated through dedicated funds within the NCA's
annual budget.
107. In 2024, the NCA supported ongoing research projects covering topics such as
competition in the grocery market, cartel policy, the media market, and digital platforms.
A total of NOK 2.4 million (USD 0.225 million) in grants was awarded to three new
projects, including studies on sustainability and competition in digital platform markets.
An overview of new, ongoing, and completed projects in 2024 is available on the NCA's
website.7

7

https://konkurransetilsynet.no/forskning/forskningsrapporter/

ANNUAL REPORT ON COMPETITION POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN NORWAY
Unclassified

