FeedLoop | NMBU Skip to main content Research Projects The FeedLoop project explores how livestock production can become more circular and sustainable by making better use of existing biomass resources. Timeframe 01 Jan 2025 - 31 Dec 2027 Research Group Breeding, Quantitative genetics and Food production systems Funding Research Council of Norway Faculty Faculty of Biosciences Shortcuts About the project By redesigning the local food systems around Tolga and Steinkjer, the project will identify solutions that reduce feed-food competition and environmental impacts, while also assessing social and economic effects. Livestock play an important role in the food system, but their production also leads to environmental challenges such as climate change, pollution, and loss of biodiversity. In addition, they increase competition for arable land between animal feed and food for human consumption. The FeedLoop project explores how livestock production can become more circular and sustainable. In a circular system, livestock are used to make use of resources that are not suitable for direct human consumption—such as by-products from agriculture or the food industry—and convert them into valuable food products like milk, meat, and eggs. The project does not primarily focus on innovative feed sources, but rather on using the resources we already have in our regions in a smarter and more efficient way. In two Norwegian municipalities, Tolga and Steinkjer, local food systems will be reviewed and "redesigned" to explore how regional resources can be better utilized. Using a data modelling tool developed in Sweden and adapted to Norwegian conditions, the project will demonstrate how biomass (such as grass, straw, or side streams from forestry and food production) can be allocated in ways that reduce conflict between animal feed and human food. At the same time, the project will assess the environmental, social, and economic effects of such changes—and what is required to enable change in practice. Project figure: Background Livestock production plays a central role in our food systems but also contributes to major environmental challenges such as greenhouse gas emissions, biodiversity loss, and competition for arable land between feed and food production. The FeedLoop project explores how local and regional food systems can be redesigned to make better use of biomass resources and reduce feed-food competition. The project will use an optimization tool and a living lab approach in the regions of Innlandet og Trøndelag to identify solutions that enhance the circularity and sustainability of food systems across environmental, social, and economic dimensions. Objectives The overall aim of the project is to promote more circular livestock production in local and regional food systems in Norway. This will be achieved by: 1) Developing an optimization tool (CIBUS-OPT) to model the optimal use of biomass for feed. 2) Proposing a redesign of the food systems in Tolga and Steinkjer to reduce feed-food competition and minimize environmental impacts. 3) Exploring synergies and trade-offs of the proposed changes across environmental, social, economic, and governance dimensions. 4) Identifying barriers and opportunities for implementing changes in existing food systems. Participants NMBU participants External participants Hanne Møller, NORSUS (WP leader) Anna Woodhouse, NORSUS Hanna Karlsson Potter, SLU (WP leader) Johan O. Karlsson, SLU Jon Olav Veie, Trøndelag Fylkeskommune Vegard Urset, Innlandet Fylkeskommune Kjersti Ane Bredesen, Tolga kommune Åsa Sakshaug Okkenhaug, Steinkjer kommune Tove Hatling Jystad, Grønt Kompetansesenter Juliana Bonin, Nasjonalt senter for fjellandbruk