EAT Impact: Transforming the food system
EAT has achieved three interconnected goals: helping establish food
systems as a global priority, generating science that informs policy-
making, practices and public narratives, and building coalitions that turn
science into action across the globe.

EAT-Lancet Commissions (2019 and 2025): Among the most influential scientific studies in
the world to date, with 600+ mentions in policy documents and 13,500+ academic citations.

Communities for Action: engaging actors in +100 countries; connecting farmers, fishers,
indigenous peoples, cities, consumers, chefs, restaurants, retailer, manufacturers, traders,
cities, countries, and health care professionals.

Stockholm Food Forum: a leading global arena for food system dialogues bringing together
heads of state, mayors, scientists, farmers, investors, activists and executives to transform
food systems.

SCIENCE
   • The 2019 EAT-Lancet Commission was the first ever effort to integrate human and
      planetary health in one framework and quantify global scientific targets for feeding
      the world within the planetary boundaries.
   • The 2025 EAT-Lancet Commission updated the Planetary Health Diet, defined food
      systems boundaries and revealed pathways to prevent millions of premature deaths
      and cut emissions at scale.
   • EAT initiated the Blue Food Assessment (2022) on the role of aquatic foods in food
      systems, and the Food System Economics Commission (2024) which quantified
      hidden costs of current food systems at over USD 15 trillion per year and showed
      transformation could deliver benefits of 5-10 trillion USD a year.

POLICY
   • A Nature study finds that the EAT-Lancet Commission is amongst the top ten non-
       economic research papers cited in policy.
   • EAT-Lancet findings are used as core references in the Kunming-Montreal Global
       Biodiversity Framework, IPBES and IPCC.
   • EAT-Lancet has been cited in EU:s Farm to Fork strategy and FEAST, an EU program
       spanning 15 countries, aligning food system reform with health and environmental
       goals.
   • Collaborations with the World Bank, the World Economic Forum, and the UN
       Committee on World Food Security.
   •   Countries around the world, including Sweden, Canada, Thailand and Indonesia use
       Planetary Health Diet principles.
   •   EAT led the sustainable consumption track of the UN Food Systems Summit (2021),
       involving 100+ countries.

CITIES
    • The C40 Good Food Cities Accelerator, launched with EAT’s support, now includes 16
       cities, including New York, London, Tokyo, and Milan, representing 130+ million
       residents.
    • Collaborations with Mexico City, Jakarta, Nairobi, and Copenhagen, who have
       partnered with EAT to strengthen dietary guidelines, procurement standards, and
       school meals informed by findings in the EAT-Lancet Commissions.
    • The Milan Urban Food Policy Pact (MUFPP), a network of 330 cities covering 550
       million inhabitants, has also allowed for translation of science to urban policies –
       with active participation in the bi-annual Milan Pact Awards and the EU-funded Food
       Trails project, which developed food policies in 11 European cities.

COMMUNITIES AND COMPANIES
  • Initiator of “Communities for Action” – a global project connecting key actors to
    transform food systems; connecting thousands of farmers, fishers,
    indigenous peoples, consumers, chefs, restaurants, retailer, manufacturers, traders,
    cities, countries, and health care professionals.
  • Collaborated with Lidl to align strategies with the Planetary Health Diet, using the
    science to increase healthy food sales, guide product ranges, marketing and targets
    for millions of customers.
  • Engagements with Google Food, Hyatt APAC, McDonald’s, PwC), Sodexo, Strawberry
    Hotels, Walt Disney World, Carrefour, Marks & Spencer, Nestlé, and Tetra Pak.
