THE FEAST GUIDE
A handbook to co-develop
interventions that focus on food,
health and sustainability
FEAST is co-funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe
research and innovation programme under grant agreement number
101060536. Views and opinions expressed are those of the author(s)
only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union.
Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held
responsible for them.
UK participant in FEAST (Good Food Oxfordshire) is supported by
Innovate UK grant number 10041509 and the Swiss participant in
FEAST (FiBL) is supported by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education,
Research and Innovation (SERI) under contract number 22.00156.

Start Date 01/07/2022, End Date 30/06/2027


Cite as:   Fabricci, I., Consalez, F., Rut, M., & Amici, I. (2025)
           The FEAST Guide – A handbook to co-develop interventions
           that focus on food, health and sustainability. FEAST project
           - Food systems that support transitions to hEalthy And
           Sustainable dieTs.




This document is shared under Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0).




                                                                          01
This Guide (part of Deliverable 4.3) represents a synthesis of insights and experiences
shared by members of the FEAST community between June 2022 and May 2025. We
extend our gratitude to all those who contributed to the FEAST activities, including
speakers, organizers, and participants.


Authors: Irene Fabricci, Fabio Consalez, Monika Rut and Ismaele Amici (ICLEI Europe).

Contributors: Cristina Biella (OpenDot), Leonie Barelds and Annemarie Kapteijns
(Louis Bolk Institute), Elsa Chiffard-Carricaburu (City of Avignon), Luisa Garcia (CIM
Alto Minho), Sandrine Bertin and Denise Cahill (Cork City), Hannelore Herreman (City
of Ghent), Carina Bell Bastlund Woollhead (Guldborgsund Municipality), Michaela
Hickersberger and Martin Hosner (Ökosoziales Forum Österreich & Europa), Marie
Mauer (Leuven 2030), Kaja Zapędowska-Kling and Aleksandra Różalska (University of
Lodz), Jessica Kopp (Good Food Oxfordshire), Adela Gjorgjioska (ARETE Sustainable
Prosperity), Chiara Ferravante (Azienda USL Toscana Nord Ovest), Pavlos- Alexandros
Kapetanakis (Sitia Municipality), Maria Konstantopoulou (Demokritos), Andreas Exner
and Livia Cepoiu (University of Graz).

We would like to thank the reviewers for critical comments and constructive
suggestions. The document has been reviewed by Anant Jani, Aditi Bunker, Elisabeth
Lindner and Pengzhu Li.


The Guide has been designed by Agnese Gualandi, Antonio Cioppa, Marta Golfera
(OpenDot).




                                                                                          02
Index:
table of contents
INTRODUCTION: THE WHAT AND WHY OF FEAST INTERVENTIONS



SHORT INTRO TO FEAST LIVING LABS



ROADMAP



6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS


 Step 1     Step 2      Step 3      Step 4   Step 5     Step 6



TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS

 Food education      Work with smallholder farmers     Food environments

 Public Food Procurement


IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES

 Case study 1     Case study 2



RESOURCES

 Storytelling as listening method

 Community workshop to co-design solutions for better access to healthier and more sustainable food

 Hack for Food, Hack for Good! methodology       Place Standard Tool: Food in My Area - the Food Lens



GLOSSARY




                                                                                                        03
         Index            INTRODUCTION: THE WHAT AND WHY OF FEAST INTERVENTIONS




Introduction: The what and why
of FEAST Interventions
Europe’s current food system is unsustainable, driving environmental degradation,
worsening public health, and straining public finances, while primarily benefiting
large food corporations. 1,2,3 Despite Europe being one of the wealthiest regions in
the world, food poverty and malnutrition remain pressing issues. In 2023, almost
10% of the EU population could not afford a nutritious meal every second day,
highlighting significant inequalities in access to healthy food. 4 Poor dietary habits,
characterized by high consumption of processed foods as well as foods high in
sugar, salt, and unhealthy fats, are fuelling non-communicable diseases like obesity,
type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular conditions. 5 These preventable diseases
account for the majority of deaths in Europe and impose a massive financial
burden, with 70% of EU healthcare spending directed toward their treatment.
Limited access to nutritious food not only worsens public health but also deepens
social inequalities, leaving vulnerable populations at even greater risk of diet-related
illnesses.

Without urgent action to transition towards healthier and more sustainable food
systems, these issues will continue to worsen, harming both people and the planet.
In this context, FEAST’s mission is to make it easy for every person in Europe to eat
a delicious, healthier, and more sustainable diet.

Local action is essential for transforming food systems by shaping food
environments and influencing food behaviours. Food environments—whether
physical or digital—serve as the contextual sphere in which food behaviours are
formed and carried out. 6 These behaviours are shaped by the interplay of attitudes,
intentions, and norms influenced by various environmental factors, including,
among others, exposure to marketing cues; the availability, accessibility, and
proximity of food; cultural traditions and social norms; socio-economic conditions;
and levels of food literacy. 7,8,9 By directly influencing the environmental factors that
shape these behaviours, local interventions can serve as a form of coordinated
grassroots initiative acting on several levels of the food-value chain to foster
healthier and more sustainable dietary habits and contribute to the well-being of
the local community.


REFERENCES:

1
  Xu, X. et al. Global greenhouse gas emissions from animal-based foods are twice those of plant-based foods. Nat Food 2,
724–732; 10.1038/s43016-021-00358-x (2021).
2
  Lobstein, T. The language of obesity just makes matters worse. Nat Hum Behav 2, 165; 10.1038/s41562-018-0295-6 (2018).
3
  Allen, L. N., Hatefi, A. & Feigl, A. B. Corporate profits versus spending on non-communicable disease prevention: an unhealthy
balance. The Lancet Global Health 7, e1482-e1483; 10.1016/S2214-109X(19)30399-7 (2019).
4
  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/w/ddn-20240712-1
5
  Changing life expectancy in European countries 1990–2021: a subanalysis of causes and risk factors from the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2021, Steel, Nicholas et al., The Lancet Public Health, Volume 0, Issue 0
6
  Swinburn, Boyd, Garry Egger, and Fezeela Raza. “Dissecting obesogenic environments: the development and application of a
framework for identifying and prioritizing environmental interventions for obesity.” Preventive medicine 29.6 (1999): 563-570.


                                                                                                                                   04
         Index             INTRODUCTION: THE WHAT AND WHY OF FEAST INTERVENTIONS




Within FEAST, partners from municipalities, research centres, and civil society
organisations come together to co-create and test innovative interventions to
tackle Food Health & Sustainability challenges by strengthening the supply of
and demand for healthier and more sustainable diets. They do this through Living
Labs, that actively include vulnerable groups (those that are struggling socially,
economically or geographically) during the identification of needs and the co-
development of solutions. Living Labs also enable analysis and corresponding
solutions that are context-specific, thus building on relevant patterns and trends
in cultural, social, economic, and food environments and which consider the
supply-side constraints to healthy choices. 10 The experimental nature of Living
Labs enables explorative spaces where different actors can come together and
contribute to shaping their own environment. While their commitment is strong,
municipalities often face many obstacles to their work, such as a lack of a
dedicated budget and up-to-date data to support their interventions and measure
their impacts. The FEAST Living Labs and all FEAST Partners have analysed these
challenges and collaboratively co-designed solutions with vulnerable groups to
tackle these challenges and support them to eat healthier and more sustainable
diets.

The FEAST Guide is a tool for municipalities across Europe that would like to get
inspired by the FEAST process and their resulting interventions and to ultimately
replicate the process of co-creating innovative and inclusive solutions to support
people to create healthier and more sustainable food environments and adopt
healthier food behaviours.

The FEAST Guide includes:
• A handy Roadmap to accompany municipalities in their journey towards Food
  Health & Sustainability Interventions
• Insights from the 12 FEAST Living Labs on four types of interventions: food
  education, work with smallholder farmers, food environments, and public
  procurement
• Two in-depth case studies from the Living Labs
• A series of useful resources for planning and implementing interventions

The FEAST Guide stems from the experiences of the Living Labs and was co-
developed with them through a series of interviews and a workshop during the
FEAST Consortium Meeting in Alto Minho, Portugal.


REFERENCES:

7
  Boyland, E. J., & Whalen, R. (2015). Food advertising to children and its effects on diet: a review of recent prevalence and impact
data. Pediatric Diabetes, 16(5), 331–337.
8
  Higgs, S. (2015). Social norms and their influence on eating behaviours. Appetite, 86, 38–44.
9
  Vidgen, H. A., & Gallegos, D. (2014). Defining food literacy and its components. Appetite, 76, 50–59
10
   https://cgspace.cgiar.org/items/96fbc3f5-5c7e-41f7-9edf-5be26db2935b




                                                                                                                                        05
      Index     SHORT INTRO TO FEAST LIVING LABS




Short intro to FEAST Living Labs
DEF   Living lab: Living Labs: Practice-driven organisations that facilitate and foster
                  open, collaborative innovation and real-life environments or arenas
                         where both open innovation and user innovation processes can be
                         studied and subject to experiments and where new solutions are
                         developed (SCAR, 2023).




                         Avignon
                         Food culture at school through cooking workshops and
                         quality school meals that valorise the local food system.



                         CIM Alto Minho
                         Transitioning to healthier and more sustainable food systems
                         in Alto Minho’s school canteens.



                         Cork
                         Driving a consultation process for the Cork Food Strategy and
                         developing a Food Hub that supports young farmers.



                         Ghent
                         Strengthening food access in underprivileged neighbourhoods.



                         Guldborgsund
                         Introducing food education and school meals in the rural
                         education system.



                         LEADER Weinviertel-Donauraum
                         Creating a more attractive environment for school food.



                         Leuven
                         Developing a community action platform on healthy and
                         sustainable diets among vulnerable groups.




                                                                                           06
  Index   SHORT INTRO TO FEAST LIVING LABS




The living labs

                 Lodz
                 Supporting the holistic health of seniors through workshops,
                 social gatherings and procurement.



                 Oxfordshire
                 Organising food education for parents in five marginalised
                 communities.



                 Prilep
                 Shaping nutritional pedagogy across the country.




                 Tuscany
                 Primary and secondary prevention: food education for
                 students and elderly alongside an outpatient paediatric
                 nutrition clinic.




                 Sitia
                 Valorising local olive oil for farmers’ incomes and health.




                                                                                07
  Index       SHORT INTRO TO FEAST LIVING LABS




The living labs




                                                 Guldborgsund




  Cork
                  Oxfordshire                                   Lodz
                                Ghent
                                  Leuven


                                                           LEADER-Region
                                                           Weinviertel Donauraum




                                Avignon
                                             Tuscany
                                                                    Prilep


 Alto minho



                                                                             Sitia




                                                                                     08
         Index                ROADMAP




Roadmap

                                              Scope what’s already there
                                STEP 1
                                              •       Map existing initiatives, networks and (community) assets
                                              •       Find the gatekeepers
                                              •       Explore new activities with current partners




             Invite different stakeholders
             •     The experts are within the community, work with them
STEP 2       •     Fill the gaps in your skills with the right partnerships
             •     Create new, innovative connections
             •     Build trust



                                    Agree on a burning problem

                     STEP 3
                                    •       Listen carefully, rather than making assumptions
                                    •       Be mindful of the language you use
                                    •       Remember that food is cultural



                                                  Co-design an intervention:
                                                  tasting solutions
                                   STEP 4
                                                  •    Don’t underestimate logistics
                                                  •    Ask people what they need and want
                                                  •    Prioritise what can be put in place easily
                                                  •    Set realistic expectations and keep people informed




                     Whet political appetite
                     •        Align the intervention with existing political and
          STEP 5
                              financial priorities
                     •        Mainstream the conversation about food
                     •        Drive attention of local politicians and policymakers to
                              your project




                                STEP 6        Generate robust evidence to evaluate impact

                                                                                                                  09
  6 STEPS TO
FOOD HEALTH &
SUSTAINABILITY
INTERVENTIONS
     Index




Step 1

Scope what’s already there

Before you start planning and designing the intervention, you need to familiarise
yourself with what is already happening in the food system in your city and
region. This will allow you to find key partners with whom to work, avoid repeating
activities that are already taking place, and learn from past projects in your area,
both successes and failures.

Map existing initiatives, networks and (community) assets that work
on food or with your target group:
Start by mapping the stakeholders that run food projects, learn about their work
and connect with them! These actors can be both within the municipality, i.e.
in other departments that work on food, health, or environment, or outside the
municipality, such as networks of NGOs and community organisations working
on the topic or with your target group. Connecting with people who have already
worked with some of the actors you plan to engage, such as schools or community
organisations, will provide insights into which actors are more responsive, or which
activities seem to be most successful.



        It takes time to find and build trust with the right stakeholders!



Find the gatekeepers:
While mapping and talking with different stakeholders, pay attention to which
names pop up often. These may be people and organisations that are trusted
by the other organisations in the space. Building a relationship and collaborating
with them may open many doors to be able to work with other organisations or
with your target groups, particularly the most disadvantaged. In fragile contexts,
trust is crucial to reach the most vulnerable populations and working with people
and organisations that they trust will increase the chances of commitment and a
successful intervention.

Explore the possibility of new activities with current partners:
While mapping organisations you don’t yet know is crucial to opening up new
horizons, be sure to also talk with the people you already know! Partners with
whom you collaborate in current projects may provide valuable insights for new
activities, with the added advantage that you have already built a relationship and
know how to work with them and vice versa.

                                                                                       11
       Index




Step 2

Invite different stakeholders
After you’ve mapped existing food organisations and projects, you will have to
decide who to invite to the table. Who will you invite to take part in the identification
of the problems, the co-design of the solution, the implementation of the
intervention and the collection of the data to understand how your intervention
worked? What should you keep in mind when making the selection? You don’t
need to work alone, you can find reliable and impactful partners!

The experts are within the community, work with them:
The best way to ensure that your understanding and analysis of the problem is
accurate and the design of your intervention targets real needs is work with people
who have first-hand experience of the issues you want to address,
whether it is food poverty, unhealthy eating habits or problems accessing a
viable market. They have the lived-experience and knowledge needed to address
these issues that is often lacking in policy-making. Working with them may mean
setting up open consultation sessions directly with members of the community or
collaborating with community organisations that serve them and represent
their interests. Remember that experts by experience will have multiple personal
and professional commitments and you may have to be flexible with your time.
Moreover, their knowledge is valuable and needs to be acknowledged. .



How to value lived experience expertise?
Examples from the FEAST Living Labs
Good Food Oxfordshire set up a model of community facilitators in five communities.
The community facilitators are usually people who were already employed in community
organisations, either as part-time staff or volunteers, and that through this role are able to
dedicate more time to the activities and be remunerated for their work. The community
facilitators received training on research skills and project management, as well as further training
on the topic of healthy diets, nutrition, inclusive food systems. The facilitators are members of
the communities where the Oxfordshire Living Lab is active, so they were pivotal in recruiting
participants and adapting the work of the Living Lab to the specific context of each community.
Each facilitator ran an initial survey, two focus groups discussions and two co-design
workshops in their community to understand the burning issue that needs to be addressed in the
community and design possible interventions. The training built capacity in the community
themselves, developing skills in data collection, data analysis and solution design.
The Ghent municipality works with deLink, a Flemish organisation that offers two-year trainings
for people experiencing poverty to become poverty experts. After the training, they can provide
policy advice on questions related to vulnerable groups. These experts are part of the working
group of local poverty organisations, health experts and city services that gives direction to the
Living Lab’s activities.


                                                                                                        12
      Index      6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




Fill the gaps in your skills with the right partnerships:
Reflect on the gaps in knowledge and skills in your team and invite people who
can fill those gaps. These may be gaps in research skills needed to understand
the root causes of a problem or to measure a baseline before implementing your
intervention or a post-intervention measurement, people to help you analyse your
data or the advocacy skills needed to give more visibility to your cause.

Create new, innovative connections.
Look beyond your circle and build links with people you did not initially consider. For
instance, the Avignon Living Lab reached out to chefs from several restaurants
in the city to develop and deliver cooking classes for children. The chefs were
enthusiastic, and the intervention created a new relationship between the local
schools and the local restaurants, which were previously disconnected. Looking for
new connections can also help you to find your first supporter, who will help you
start your movement. This is what happened in Guldborgsund, where, in an
effort to initiate public school meals in the municipality, the Living Lab team
looked beyond the education department and found an ally in the public health
department, who helped to frame school meals as disease prevention, thus gaining
support with health officers.


     VIDEO - How to start a movement



Build trust.
Take the time to develop the relationship with your partners, strong relationships
are key to impactful interventions!




ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:


    Telling stories and shaping solutions (2020): A toolkit showing techniques, strategies
    and best practices to empower people who have lived experience of food poverty.
    Involving experts by experience (2016) A guidebook explaining how to involve experts
    by experience in policy influencing activities and events.




                                                                                             13
     Index




Step 3

Agree on a burning problem
Once you’ve decided who to invite to the table, you will need to collectively
understand the issues that prevent people in the community from eating a healthier
and more sustainable diet, and which issue is the most pressing.


Talk with people from your target beneficiary group and listen
carefully, rather than making assumptions:
Conduct interviews, workshops, meetings with the people you want to work for and
with, to ask them what problems they are facing. Truly listen to the answers, which
will often defy your assumptions, that are based on your experience of the world
and your perception of the problem. One example comes from the Ghent Living
Lab: the municipality noticed that people on low incomes did not make use of
solidarity pricing of Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), which is meant to
make vegetables more financially accessible. One of the poverty organisations
involved in the intervention conducted an experiment and worked with people in
poverty on the land of the CSA farm. During this experiment, they found out that
working outdoors and being part of a community was much more important than
harvesting fruits and vegetables for themselves. Therefore, the problem was not
the price, but what was offered and what the community members got in return.


  RESOURCE - Storytelling as listening method



Be mindful of the language you use:
we all have different experiences, ideas and ideals and the language we speak
usually reflects this diversity. While two people may both speak English, the
meaning behind their words is shaped by a myriad of factors that can end up
conveying or receiving very different messages. We all engage in communication
by using our own framing. While it is not possible to speak everyone’s language,
it is important to try to engage stakeholders through positive, clear and inclusive
language. Language that is not polarising can also inspire wider commitment:
striving for more “tasty food” will be more widely accepted than pushing for more
“healthy food”.




                                                                                      14
       Index        6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




Remember that food is cultural:
When working towards dietary transitions, it is paramount to recognise people’s
food culture and their previous food experiences. This means recognising people’s
attachment to their cultural foods (dishes that are perceived as unique to and
emblematic of a culture), as well as their food culture – the set of customary
practices and beliefs that define how food is part of a population’s daily life and
social structure. People hold very strong cultural beliefs on what sustainable food
is and what a healthy diet looks like. How can we value the diversity of food
cultures in our societies, while fostering the changes necessary to promote
healthier and more sustainable diets for us and the generations to come?




Paying attention to food’s cultural dimension -
examples from the FEAST Living Labs
In Guldborgsund, the Food School teaches students new, plant-based interpretations of
traditional danish smørrebrød (which is also the main staple of homemade school lunches, with
cold meat cuts on ryebread).
The Tuscany Living Lab uses the Cross-Cultural Food Pyramid, elaborated by the Italian Society
of Pediatrics, within the outpatient pediatric nutrition clinic as food education tool. This tool, in
line with today’s multiethnic society, combines the Mediterranean Diet model with typical foods
from different food traditions (particularly from Asia, Africa, and South America Regions), so as
to provide children and their families with useful knowledge to integrate into their daily routines
in accordance with their food culture.




ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:


     Positive communication toolkit (2021): A toolkit exploring how to implement
     positive and optimistic communication strategies around environmental and animal
     conservation topics.
     Food citizenship: a communication toolkit (2017): A toolkit for organization in the
     agrifood sector aiming to improve their communication towards citizens rather than
     consumers.




                                                                                                        15
      Index




Step 4

Co-design the intervention
After analysing the problems the community faces, you can start co-creating
solutions with them. This will involve one or more moments of encounter, either
in person or online, in which everyone can share ideas and brainstorm possible
actions. Before these encounters, you’ll need to think about the logistics – the
location, the invites, the agenda – as well as the appropriate methodology for your
workshop. After the meeting, you’ll have to think of which actions to start with and
how to keep participants engaged over time.

Don’t underestimate logistics:
when planning your co-design activities, special attention should be placed on
where, when, and how you will meet, to ensure that people with specific needs can
access the event and be included. How can you take care of a full range of special
needs to ensure inclusivity? Think of the location of the event, is it reachable by
affordable public transport? Are there parking opportunities nearby? Is it close to
the area where the people who would have more difficulty joining live or work? Is
the venue accessible for people with limited mobility? Are there enough seating
options for people who will get tired more easily? Reflect on the timing of the event:
what would be the best time of the day and week for working people to come, e.g.
the evening or in the weekend? How long should the workshop be? How can you
make the format more inclusive? Can you organise multiple events with smaller
groups, or one event with small breakout groups to support people’s confidence
when sharing their ideas? Is it possible to provide childcare for people who will
have to come with their children? Can you hire a facilitator that has proven cultural
awareness skills? Depending on the length of the session, try to ensure healthy and
sustainablerefreshments and meal options are available.

Ask people what they need and want:
the main goals of co-design are to create a sense of ownership among the people
involved and to make sure that an intervention will be truly useful for those we are
trying to support. What is their vision of a healthy and sustainable diet and how do
they imagine getting there? For this, it is necessary to create formats that allow
them to share their ideas and opinions freely, the responses may surprise you! For
example, while co-developing the intervention in Ghent, people from lower-income
households said they do not need a new cookbook to show them how to cook
healthy meals, but rather they want more access to fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the other hand, in Oxfordshire, families making use of food support, such as



                                                                                         16
      Index       6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




food banks or community larders, were enthusiastic about the idea of learning
new recipes and cooking techniques to help them adopt a healthier diet. This
meant that in Ghent and Oxfordshire, a similar starting point led to two completely
different solutions, based on the needs of the community.


   RESOURCE - Explore workshop methodologies that include visioning exercises



Prioritise what can be put in place easily:
at the beginning you may want to focus on a small intervention that can be
implemented with limited resources. Once the intervention is running successfully,
you will have a concrete example of your work to showcase and gain support from
other actors. Be sure to publicise your success!


Set realistic expectations and keep people informed:
while in a co-design process you want to involve people from the beginning, you
can’t make any promises about the results at the start. Be clear and realistic about
the results that will be possible from the co-design exercise at this initial stage,
based on the financial and political support your solution already has. Additionally,
after the co-design event, set up communication channels with the participants,
such as emails, a newsletter, a WhatsApp group or field visits. Make sure to
communicate openly about what is happening or is not happening.




ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:


    The power of many (2024): A guide for city officials and policymakers on how to
    design co-creation processes involving different stakeholders for environmental
    sustainability and social justice related projects.
    Getting participation right (and wrong) (2023): A blog article showcasing success and
    unsuccess \stories of recruitment processes in co-design and group decision-making
    activities.
    Equitable events handbook (2023): A handbook providing guidelines to organize non-
    discriminatory, equitable and inclusive events.



                                                                                            17
       Index




Step 5

Whet political appetite
To institutionalise your intervention and, ideally, obtain funding to ensure its
continuity over time, or to expand to different groups, you will need political support
from the policymakers who decide on these matters.


Align the intervention with existing political and financial priorities:
if your city already has a policy on food, such as a food strategy, you should make
sure that your intervention and its impacts align with the objectives of this policy.
However, not all cities may have a policy on food, as they could prioritise other
themes, such as health or climate. But fret not! Food is cross-sectoral, and as such,
you can link your intervention to other priorities of your municipality. The
Guldborgsund Living Lab, for instance, shifted the perspective from food to the
health agenda, framing the impact of school meals in relation to the positive
effects on childrens’ health. This way, they leveraged one of the priorities of the
Guldborgsund Municipality (health) and gained allies in another municipal
department to support their work.



Aligning interventions with the city’s strategies – examples from the FEAST
Living Labs
The city of Ghent has had a food strategy for more than 10 years, which was designed by the
Gent Food Council and adopted by the city council. The strategy has three main objectives: 1. a
short and sustainable food chain 2. sustainable food for everyone 3. no food waste. The
interventions of the Ghent Living Lab implement the objectives “Sustainable food for all” as well
as “Short and sustainable food chain”.

In Guldborgsund, the Committee for Children and Learning has a strategy that states “Care and
health promotion: Through partnerships, we will work to provide more information about health
so that children, young people and parents have the best conditions for making healthy choices.
We want to offer healthy food in daycare centres and schools and give children and young
people a taste for healthy choices.” By aligning its interventions with the goals of this strategy, the
Guldborgsund Living Lab was able to obtain the mandate to work on food in schools and food
literacy for students.

Cork has just received the EU Mission label for Climate Action and Smart Cities. The Test Site
group in the Cork Living Lab is using this opportunity to make developing urban agriculture
relevant to the Net Zero objectives and other City’s strategies related to economic development,
biodiversity and climate action. There is a biodiversity and foraging zone on the site, a composting
pilot with a business on waste prevention and reduction. Moreover, the head market gardener
is a Chef who is developing a selling plan with a group of restaurants very supportive of local
food growers, which ties in with the objectives to develop Cork as the Food Capital of Ireland and
encourages stakeholders to include sustainability in their plans.

                                                                                                          18
     Index      6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




Mainstream the conversation about food:
while your intervention may be focused on a specific issue, target group or
location, you can highlight the importance of the topic by talking about food and its
relevance for different themes of urban development, such as climate, health, green
spaces, social cohesion. Mainstreaming the conversation about food allows you to
build onto the momentum of existing initiatives in other departments. For instance,
the Living Lab in Guldborgsund tied the topic of food to the city’s Climate Action
Plans by spearheading an intervention in the canteen of the municipality, which
aimed to decrease the CO2 impact of the municipal meals through a reduction of
food waste as well as the increase of organic purchases and skills development
for canteen staff. The initiative worked wonders in terms of people talking about
climate and food in the municipal building. And thus it paved the way for MORE talk,
more discussion, more interest in food.

Drive attention of local politicians and policymakers to your project:
people don’t always understand how to influence policy, but sometimes it’s easier
than we imagine. Involve people from the community, bring them together and give
them a platform to voice their concerns. Bring these concerns (and the people!) to
the policy makers. Especially at the local level, moments of encounter are easier to
organise and have the most impact. Involve local media during your interventions
and attract the attention of local politicians. Contact them often so that they know
who you are and can recognise you.




                                                                                        19
      Index




Step 6

Generate robust evidence
to evaluate impact
Demonstrating the impact of planned interventions is essential, not only to
showcase areas of improvement to funders and policy makers but also to give
back to the community by creating conditions for long-lasting systemic change.
Therefore, impact needs to be planned from the early design phases of an
intervention and integrated through the whole intervention process. Ask yourself:
What change do you want to see in your city, community, or target groups? What
short-term changes will result immediately from the intervention; for example,
setting up a community garden? What long-term impacts could emerge, such
as sustained community involvement in land stewardship or better access to
fresh and healthy vegetables over time? Integrating impact assessment into
your interventions is crucial for demonstrating the cross-sectoral nature of food
systems. Consider how the intervention you are leading can generate positive co
benefits across multiple sectors. For example, enabling access to fresh vegetables
and fruits in communities contributes to long-term reductions in public health
expenditures by preventing diet-related diseases. Developing tenders that enable
small-scale farmers to participate in the bidding and strengthening of local food
economies.

There are multiple ways to measure impact, both qualitative and quantitative.
Setting a baseline of what you would like to measure, how and why is key to
understanding your starting point.

•   Qualitative methods - such as fieldwork, focus groups, and interviews - can be
    time - intensive but offer powerful stories of change, giving voice to the people
    driving the interventions.
•   Quantitative measures, often framed as datasets, allow for broader
    comparisons and hypothesis testing and are frequently used to inform policy
    makers.

Ideally, a mix of methods is used to collect, analyse, and communicate the impact
achieved on the ground. It would be ideal to design the evaluation in a simple way
that means you and your team can do the data collection and analysis based on
the skills you have but there could be instances where this is not possible. In some
cases, impact measurement can be an overwhelming process that involves expert
knowledge.




                                                                                        20
       Index        6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




For example, developing consent forms and setting up evaluation methods.
Therefore, it is helpful to work with trained professionals. This can be achieved, for
example, through collaboration with universities, where PhD students or postdocs
conducting relevant research can contribute to setting up impact assessment
frameworks.



Example in FEAST: Healthy and Sustainable Diets and Food Education
In achieving impact through the interventions, FEAST has served as an enabler for many LLs,
fostering better dialogue between city departments and various food sector stakeholders,
including small-scale producers, school canteen staff, catering companies, and food
organisations. This in many of the FEAST LL, has led to improving access to and affordability of
healthy, sustainable meals across public institutions such as schools and elderly homes.

FEAST Living Labs have achieved a variety of outcomes, including:

•   Bringing social and political attention to the most precious investment for the future: children
•   Making children agents of change by involving them in decisions about their own diets,
    participating in the reduction of food waste
•   Empowering vulnerable groups to identify durable tools for food accessibility
•   Emphasizing the diversity of knowledge and the collective intelligence as community
    empowering tool

For example, in Alto Minho, ten municipalities joined forces to coordinate their school meal
programs, ensuring that procurement processes support local farmers. Similarly, in Avignon,
procurement criteria were reshaped to prioritize small-scale food producers, leading to an
increase in local and seasonal food consumption in schools. In Lodz, menus in elderly homes
were redesigned to increase the number of fresh vegetables served, ensuring that meal changes
align with both the dietary and taste preferences of the elderly. Meanwhile, in Prilep, a revision
of national nutritional guidelines was undertaken, incorporating food education to school meals
programmes. While procurement might be seen as a low-hanging fruit, its co-benefits are
emerging from the FEAST LL, particularly in strengthening local food economies. By creating
demand for local, seasonal, and homegrown food, procurement supports small-scale food
producers, who often struggle to obtain a fair income in a sector where jobs are in decline.




                                                                                                       21
   TYPES OF
INTERVENTIONS
     Index       6 STEPS TO FOOD HEALTH & SUSTAINABILITY INTERVENTIONS




Types of interventions
The twelve FEAST Living Labs have approached the topic of healthy and
sustainable diets through different angles. This is due to the different geographical
contexts and target groups of their activities. As the process of co-creation in each
Living Lab was anchored in the local reality and the needs of the target groups, the
resulting interventions differed in focus and scope.

Nevertheless, the interventions can be grouped in four broad typologies:


                       Type 1: Food education
                        Children and students      With parents

                        With professionals      With elderly people


                       Type 2: Work with smallholder farmers
                        Access to resources

                        Valorising cultural products


                       Type 3: Food environments
                        Addressing food deserts and food swamps

                        Designing physical food spaces

                        Shaping food environments through governance and research


                       Type 4: Public food procurement
                        Changing menus and suppliers for healthy and appealing school meals

                        Improving food quality for people and planet




This section presents insights from the Living Labs for each of these typologies.




                                                                                              23
                                                 Index      TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                         Food education is one of the elements needed to empower people and




type 1: Food education
                         communities to choose nutritious and sustainable food — teaching people
                         about food production, nutrition, cooking, and sustainability opportunities and
                         challenges. This approach can equip individuals with the skills to make informed
                         decisions to optimize their nutritional intake, reduce food waste, and support the
                         transition towards sustainable food systems. The ultimate objective of food
                         education is to empower individuals and communities to decide consciously and
                         responsibly about their food choices and cultivate lifelong habits that promote
                         good health. Food education starts with children: attitude forming is easier than
                         attitude change. However, learning is a lifelong activity and food education can
                         also target adults and elderly populations.

                         Many FEAST Living Labs work on food education with different groups:

                                                   The Avignon Living Lab organised cooking classes and lessons on food
                                                   systems for elementary school children in collaboration with chefs from local




                         Children and students
                                                   restaurants. The chefs came up with a menu that included local and seasonal
                                                   ingredients and taught the recipes to the children in a pedagogical kitchen
                                                   located in a social centre. Because of the limited capacity of the kitchen and
                                                   safety requirements, while half of the children were cooking, the other half took
                                                   part in more theoretical classes on nutrition and healthy diets. At the end of the
                                                   cooking class, all the children and the chef shared the meal they cooked.

                                                   In Guldborgsund, the FEAST Living Lab partnered with a private food school
                                                   to provide a series of cooking classes for all the students in 5th and 6th grade
                                                   in 13 public schools. The municipality paid for the cooking classes and the
                                                   schools organised the transport to the location of the cooking courses.

                                                   The Tuscany Living Lab co-designed lessons on sustainable and healthy
                                                   diets with around 100 middle and high school students from Piana di Lucca
                                                   and Valle del Serchio. These lessons, organized in seven thematic modules
                                                   including theoretical and practical activities, aimed to foster a healthy and
                                                   aware approach towards food and nutrition in the students and were co-
                                                   designed through a questionnaire and in-depth meetings. At the end of the
                                                   co-design process, a “classroom pact” was drafted and signed by all students
                                                   to collectively agree on the concept of the course and the topics to be covered.
                                                   This secured the agreement and cooperation of the students throughout the
                                                   course of the lessons.


                                                   In Oxfordshire, the FEAST Living Lab is working with five community groups
                                                   to examine the barriers that make it difficult for parents with children under



                         With parents
                                                   5 to adopt healthier and more sustainable eating habits, and to identify and
                                                   implement innovative strategies that enable these groups to integrate healthier
                                                   and more sustainable food choices into their daily lives. Their intervention
                                                   explored both community cooking interventions, where parents could learn
                                                   quick and easy healthy recipes for the whole family and a digital hub of healthy
                                                   family friendly recipes, evidence based nutritional advice and meal plans.
                                                   The Tuscany Living Lab set up an outpatient paediatric nutrition clinic within
                                                   the Piana di Lucca District Zone to promote healthier and more conscious
                                                   food choices by providing children and their families with useful knowledge,




                                                                                                                                        24
                      Index      TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                        strategies and tools that they can integrate into their daily routine. The service
                        is free of charge and aimed at children and adolescents aged 5 to 16 for needs
                        concerning nutrition, such as overweight and obesity. To access the outpatient
                        clinic, a request from the general practitioner or the paediatrician is needed.


                        The Prilep Living Lab, whose project was titled “Building Healthy Eating
                        Habits Amongst Preschool Children,” is a critical initiative aimed at creating




With professionals
                        sustainable food systems in North Macedonia. By equipping kindergarten
                        teachers with comprehensive training on nutritional pedagogy, the Living Lab
                        empowers educators to instill healthy eating habits from an early age. The
                        “Magic Plate” tool, along with policy guidelines and interactive workshops, form
                        the core of the intervention.

                        The Guldborgsund Living Lab developed an intervention at the public canteen
                        level with the aim of making them more environmentally sustainable. Two
                        talented chefs organized a comprehensive training program that went in-depth
                        into taste, texture and ingredients, and put it all into a climate perspective. The
                        municipality then invited the dietary managers of the municipality’s daycare
                        center to participate in the training alongside the municipality canteen chefs. At
                        the end of the project, they published a collection of sustainable food recipes
                        and made them available to other kitchen professionals in the municipality.
                        Many people in Guldborgsund are looking for inspiration and knowledge on
                        how to cook ‘greener food’ in public kitchens.

                        The Leuven Living Lab organised a series of activities for cooks, community
                        workers and visitors of four social restaurants in Leuven in collaboration with
                        its partners. The activities aimed at opening the dialogue and strenghtening
                        existing knowledge. During a six-month trajectory, (cooking) workshops were
                        organised, community workers were connected via the interactive community
                        action platform and a study on communication and the perception of healthy
                        and sustainable food was performed.

                        The Lodz Living Lab organised lessons on healthy diets for the residents of a
                        daycare home for older people. The classes started from the basics, with basic




With elderly people
                        terminology around food and nutrition, what a healthy, balanced diet means,
                        and why people over 60 need a special diet. The Living Lab adopted a holistic
                        approach to health: they did not only focus on the residents’ diet, but also
                        addressed physical health, mental health, psychological safety, physical activity,
                        and attention to group dynamics. For example, they organised yoga classes
                        combined with a healthy and sustainable breakfast, and an intergenerational
                        picnic where the residents of the daycare home could meet students for the
                        city’s university.

                        In Tuscany, the Living Lab organised a series of events for elderly people
                        named “Health in the third age: prevention strategies for healthy and active
                        aging”. They paired nutrition with other topics such as mental well-being,
                        physical activity, proper use of antibiotics and adherence to vaccination
                        and screening campaigns. The series of events created a fruitful informal
                        discussion space between health professionals and citizens in which useful
                        strategies, tools, materials and information were shared that can be carried and
                        applied in everyday life.




                                                                                                              25
                                                                  Index      TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                                            To achieve a more sustainable food system and support healthier diets, it is




type 2: Work with smallholder farmerstion
                                            paramount to work with the people who are actually producing the food that
                                            reaches our table. Small-scale farmers represent nearly 40% of farmers in the
                                            EU. They ensure sustainable and more secure access to fresh, diverse and
                                            seasonal food, which can strengthen the resilience and cultural significance
                                            of the city-region food systems. They are the main promoters of sustainable
                                            agricultural practices that support biodiversity and soil health. However, they
                                            are often the ones that face the strongest challenges in finding secure land or a
                                            market for their products, making a fair income, or accessing the resources
                                            that they need to succeed.

                                            The importance of working with smallholder farmers was recognised by some of
                                            the Living Labs, whose activities focused on:

                                                                    The Living Lab of CIM Alto Minho worked with the smallholder farmers in the
                                                                    region to ensure that they would be able to supply schools with the products




                                            Access to resources
                                                                    they needed for school meals. They conducted market dialogues where they
                                                                    asked farmers the types and quantities of products they would be able to
                                                                    provide, with the intent of tailoring the menus in the schools. Moreover, they
                                                                    geomapped many of the producers in the area to ensure that potential
                                                                    customers could find out about them. Both of these actions aimed to provide
                                                                    local smallholder farmers with access to new markets.

                                                                    The Cork City Living Lab focuses on setting the stage for urban agriculture
                                                                    by supporting farmers in accessing land, creating a network and developing
                                                                    skills. Firstly, they set up a 1-acre plot of land that functions as an incubator.
                                                                    The Test Site incubator started with a group of skilled growers: two market
                                                                    gardeners freshly graduated from the local school of horticulture, two
                                                                    community gardeners learning intensive market garden techniques with them
                                                                    and two allotment gardeners supporting with tasks such as watering, weeding,
                                                                    composting, etc. The group is developing an innovative model of community
                                                                    market gardening, where market gardeners can develop an activity with the
                                                                    help of community gardeners, directly inspired by people’s contributions to a
                                                                    preliminary consultation and co-design process. As a new community group,
                                                                    they tied in with the existing network of horticulturalists and food growers
                                                                    from Cork City’s 29 community gardens, to keep each other informed on
                                                                    developments about urban agriculture in the city, and actively work together.
                                                                    Finally, they have developed the Biodiversity Hub, an educational centre where
                                                                    the people from the network and beyond can gather and share their knowledge
                                                                    and build each other’s capacity. The project evolved from offering land as a
                                                                    resource to giving access to a natural space and networks to co-create a new
                                                                    community of growers. The community aspect turned out to be paramount as
                                                                    opposed to location or quality of land.




                                                                                                                                                         26
                               Index          TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS




                                 After conducting interviews with olive farmers, the Sitia Living Lab understood
                                 that farmers face strenuous conditions because of the impact of climate




Valorising cultural products
                                 change on their crops, and the harvest losses have a negative impact not only
                                 on their income, but also on their diets. Because of the rising prices of olive
                                 oil due to poor harvests, olive farmers opt to not use olive oil for their own
                                 consumption, thus altering their cultural Mediterranean diet, with dire impacts
                                 on their health. To counter this, the Living Lab set up olive oil panels where
                                 people can taste olive oil produced locally and recognise its quality.

                                 In Avignon, all the meals served in the city’s schools are produced in one
                                 central kitchen run by the municipality. The Living Lab decreased the amount
                                 of meat served in the school canteens and developed a partnership with local
                                 meat producers to provide products of higher quality to the central kitchen and
                                 support the local food economy. This enabled the Avignon Living Lab to push
                                 for less and better meat, from local producers who raise animals in a more
                                 ethical manner than industrial livestock producers.




                                 Sitia Living Lab                      Avignon Living Lab




                                 Cork Living Lab




                                                                                                                   27
                                                            Index         TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                            The concept of food environment defines where people interact with food and




type 3: Food environments
                            make decisions about what to eat. This includes both physical places, such as
                            supermarkets, canteens, and farmers’ markets, and the food messaging people
                            are exposed to, such as awareness campaigns and advertisements. Food
                            environments are shaped by physical, economic, political and socio-cultural
                            factors that influence peoples’ dietary preferences.11

                            FEAST Living Labs work on food environments in different ways, both in terms of
                            physical spaces and food messaging:

                                                              The Ghent Living Lab is working in two lower-income neighbourhoods.
                                                              In one neighbourhood, the Living Lab, including the poverty organisation




                             Food deserts and food swamps
                                                              SIVI, partners with a CSA farm to grow vegetables with people from the
                                                              neighbourhood. The harvest will be processed in long-life products and
                                                              meals to be redistributed. In the other neighbourhood, the Living Lab set
                                                              up a local farmers’ market to increase residents’ access to fresh fruits,
                                                              vegetables, eggs and milk. Mindful of the financial barriers that people
                                                              often face when accessing fresh and, especially, organic products, the
                                                              farmers at the market do not sell exclusively organic produce - the meat
                                                              and dairy sold are organic, while the fruits and vegetables are not. While
                                                              this trade-off may decrease the sustainability impact of the intervention,
                                                              it will nonetheless shorten the supply chain and increase influx of healthy
                                                              foods in the neighbourhood, while also increasing the accessibility of
                                                              lower-climate impact plant-based foods. In addition, the Living Lab is
                                                              planning to set up a social restaurant in the canteen of a local hospital,
                                                              which would become accessible to all residents.

                                                              In Lodz, the FEAST Living Lab redesigned the space of the senior home
                                                              by planting vegetables, herbs, flowers and encouraging seniors to do




                            Design physical food spaces
                                                              more gardening. The team built two gardens where the residents of
                                                              the senior day centre could grow their own vegetables. One of the two
                                                              gardens is a raised bed that was custom built by the Living Lab team to
                                                              be used by people with limited mobility. The vegetables and herbs from
                                                              the garden were for the residents’ meals and as part of the cooking
                                                              classes they were involved in.




                                                              Lodz Living Lab                             Lodz Living Lab




                                                                                                                                            28
                          Index         TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                            After launching the discussion document outlining the vision for the
                            Sustainable and Healthy Cork Food Strategy in August 2024, the Cork




Governance and research
                            City Living Lab initiated a participatory consultation process with the
                            public and local food system stakeholders to refine and define the vision
                            for Cork’s Sustainable and Healthy local Food Strategy. The strategy
                            aims to address the current shortage of locally grown food and the high
                            reliance on food imports. Additionally, by fostering cross - departmental
                            collaboration, the Living Lab has begun aligning with health - related
                            projects to pilot the use of the Place Standard Tool - Food Lens. This tool
                            aims to engage and support food - disadvantaged communities within
                            the Sláintecare Healthy Communities12 program in assessing their
                            local food environment. Findings from this pilot study will further inform
                            the development of the food strategy.




                            Ghent Living Lab




REFERENCES:

11 https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/4ac1286e-eef3-4f1d-b5bd-
d92f5d1ce738/content
12 https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/slaintecare-healthy-communities/.




                                                                                                          29
                                                                                                        Index      TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS


                                  In Europe, local and regional public authorities play a key role in the




type 4: Public Food Procurement
                                  implementation of sustainable food systems, and they have the mandate to
                                  procure food or catering services for their institutions and bodies, such as
                                  schools, daycares, hospitals, and beyond. Not only do they command the
                                  budgets, and thus have the power to exert market pressure, they have the
                                  responsibility to beexemplary in how they spend taxpayers’ money. Sustainable
                                  procurement involves looking beyond short-term needs and considering the
                                  longer-term impacts of each purchasee (Buy Better Food Manifesto).

                                  Some of the Living Labs have focused on improving public food procurement
                                  through different means including:


                                                                                                          The Avignon Living Lab has been working to improve the quality of
                                                                                                          food in municipal schools by directly influencing the supply from the




                                  Changing menus and suppliers for healthy and appealing school meals
                                                                                                          central municipal kitchen, which serves approximately 6,000 meals daily.
                                                                                                          By introducing vegetarian options twice a week and collaborating with
                                                                                                          local meat suppliers to offer higher-quality meat, the Living Lab aims
                                                                                                          to provide children with more sustainable and nutritious meals. These
                                                                                                          efforts have led to an overall improvement in meal quality while also
                                                                                                          reducing costs. However, the initiative faced challenges, particularly
                                                                                                          pushback from some parents and school canteen staff regarding the
                                                                                                          reduction in meat portions. To address these concerns, the Living Lab
                                                                                                          began distributing newsletters to parents highlighting the benefits of
                                                                                                          the changes and offering insights into the local producers supplying the
                                                                                                          high-quality ingredients. Additionally, some students and canteen staff
                                                                                                          had the opportunity to meet local producers and take photos, giving
                                                                                                          them a deeper understanding of where their food comes from.

                                                                                                          By engaging a wide range of local stakeholders at the Korneuburg
                                                                                                          campus—including school administrators, teachers, kitchen staff,
                                                                                                          parents, municipal representatives, and nearby food providers—the
                                                                                                          LEADER Weinviertel-Donauraum Living Lab is working to make school
                                                                                                          food more attractive, healthy and sustainable. A survey among students
                                                                                                          and parents, and talks with school personnel revealed that many
                                                                                                          teenagers skipped the canteen in favour of nearby junk-food options,
                                                                                                          leading to both nutritional and environmental concerns. Through
                                                                                                          collaborative workshops and feedback sessions, the Living Lab wants
                                                                                                          to identify specific barriers (e.g., menu variety, taste preferences, portion
                                                                                                          sizes) and co-develop strategies to address them. These range from
                                                                                                          small menu adjustments and better communication about ingredients
                                                                                                          to improved meal presentation and potential price incentives. In the next
                                                                                                          phase, the Living Lab will align with local food suppliers and nutrition
                                                                                                          experts to source higher-quality, regionally produced foods—helping to
                                                                                                          reinforce a healthier, more appealing food environment on the campus.




                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                               Index        TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS




                                                 By integrating these insights into the overall school-meal planning
                                                 process, Korneuburg aims to reduce junk-food consumption among
                                                 students, support local producers, and inspire other municipalities to
                                                 adopt similarly holistic approaches to fostering healthier and more
                                                 sustainable eating habits.

                                                 Guldborgsund Living Lab is working hard to set up free school meals for
                                                 all children in the municipality, which so far do not exist in the context of




Improving food quality for people and planet
                                                 rural Denmark. It is a long process that requires a lot of considerations
                                                 not only in terms of finances but also in logistics, responsibilities,
                                                 cooperation, and administration. In the meantime, the Living Lab set up
                                                 another public procurement intervention to support the green transition
                                                 of the municipal canteen where all public servants can have lunch. For a
                                                 few months, food purchases were measured and weighed very carefully
                                                 to calculate CO2 accounts for all product groups, including meat, fruit
                                                 and vegetables, dairy products, groceries and everything else that is
                                                 purchased to keep the canteen supplied. This guided the change
                                                 in products purchased, opting for more seasonal and local products,
                                                 which, alongside cooking trainings for the chefs, delivered a change
                                                 towards healthier and more sustainable meals for the people who will
                                                 work on setting up the school meals system for children.

                                                 In Lodz, the Living Lab is negotiating with the manager of the senior care
                                                 centre to drive a change in the institution’s procurement procedure, to
                                                 increase quality requirements for purchased meals. This would not only
                                                 benefit the health and wellbeing of the seniors eating the food, but also
                                                 the environmental impact of the meals they are served.




                                                 Guldborgsund Living Lab




                                                                                                                                 31
IN-DEPTH CASE
   STUDIES
        Index     IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES




In-depth case studies

Lodz Living Lab




Lodz Living Lab



Background
Healthy eating is part of healthy aging. The LL in Lodz is helping to improve diets
in a senior home to demonstrate how food procurement can be improved in this
institutional setting, aiming at a higher - level policy change inspired by the LL’s
successes.

Intervention
The LL was focusing on awareness raising and education of seniors and staff. In
addition to incorporating healthier, more nutritious and more sustainable meals
in Senior Homes, the LL wanted to improve access to self-grown herbs and
vegetables, to increase knowledge of healthy diets, and of the nutritional needs
of people 60+, and to support a holistic approach to seniors’ well-being through
increasing physical activity, reducing social isolation and strengthening the bonds
with other seniors in the senior home. To this end, the LL organized workshops,
games, participatory discussions and mini-lectures, and provided audiovisual
materials and the opportunity to taste new food. Regarding the improvement of
meals at the senior home, the project modified the procurement procedure, based
on in-depth interviews on food habits and meal satisfaction with seniors, and the
manager of the facility delivering food to the senior home.




                                                                                       33
      Index      IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES




Impact measurement approach
The impact of this intervention was measured by a questionnaire measuring food
knowledge, food habits, food attitudes and well-being administered to the senior
home where the intervention took place as well as to two other senior homes as
control group. The study included 76 participants spread across the Control and
Intervention groups as follows: 32 from Control Group 1 (62.5% women, average
age 79), 27 from Control Group 2 (59.3% women, average age 80), and 16 from the
Living Lab in Tuszyn that was exposed to the intervention (LL, 68.8% women,
average age 78).

Outcomes
Meals are now more diversified, and three quality requirements were added to
the procurement announcement: a) at least one vegetarian lunch per week, 2)
seasonal fruit added to lunch, c) salads prepared accordingly to special needs of
elderly (chewing problems). Meal satisfaction is now higher than before, and the
sense of food agency has increased.Residents of the Senior Home targeted by the
Living Lab rated their meal quality much higher than those of the two other Senior
Homes (Control Group 1 [CG1], Control Group 2 [CG2]). 75% rated it as very positive,
compared to 9.4% in CG1 and 22.2% in CG2. Additionally, 75% of Living Lab
participants felt that the quality of their meals had recently improved, compared
to 28.1% in CG1 and 29.6% in CG2. Moreover, Living Lab participants were more
open to trying new foods, with 81.3% expressing such interest, compared to 56.3%
in CG1 and 74.1% in CG2. Importantly, Living Lab participants more frequently
reported that they eat healthily (68.8%) compared to 34.4% in CG1 and 14.8% in
CG2. Additionally, a larger portion of Living Lab participants (62.5%) believed they
know how to eat healthily, compared to 43.8% in CG1 and 29.6% in CG2. The
average self-assessed health score was also higher in the Living Lab group
(8.06/10) compared to 5.56/10 in CG1 and 5.74/10 in CG2.

Living Lab participants also stood out in terms of their fresh vegetable
consumption – 68.8% reported eating vegetables several times a day, compared
to 40.6% in CG1 and 37% in CG2. The trend was not as pronounced with fresh
fruit but the Living Lab participants still reported consuming more fruits, with
56.3% of Living Lab participants consuming them several times a day, compared
to 21.9% in CG1 and 51.9% in CG2. Residents of the Senior Home targeted by the
Living Lab also had a significantly higher knowledge of healthy products. On a list
of 14 items (hummus, chickpeas, avocado, guacamole, mango, turmeric, coconut
milk, sushi, oat milk, flaxseed oil, black cumin, ginger, stevia, erythritol), Living Lab
participants recognized an average of 12 items, while participants from CG1 and
CG2 recognized just 5 items. A similar trend was observed in actual consumption,
with Living Lab participants consuming an average of 13 out of 14 items, compared
to just three in CG2 and five in CG1. While these outcomes are promising, work will
continue in Lodz to strengthen the evidence on impact – particularly by ensuring
baseline measures are taken before implementing the intervention and also
increasing the number of people who receive the holistic intervention seniors in
Tuszyn received.

                                                                                            34
       Index         IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES




In-depth case studies

Tuscany Living Lab




Tuscany Living Lab



Background
To foster a healthy and conscious approach toward food and nutrition, the Tuscany
LL was working in middle and high schools with about 100 students attending
a special food course. The background of these activities is growing obesity
and overweight in regional youth populations. Moreover, many students report
unhealthy eating practices such as leaving out breakfast and eating little fruits and
vegetables.

Intervention
A food course was designed and included several lessons in seven thematic
modules ranging from theoretical to practical, interactive activities. To prepare it, a
questionnaire to measure food literacy, adherence to the Mediterranean Diet as well
as food beliefs, habits, attitudes and obstacles to change these was developed.
Moreover, in-depth discussions with students about their food habits took place. A
classroom pact was signed before the lessons to ensure shared understandings.




                                                                                          35
 Index      IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES




Module 1: “The nutrients that compose our food”
  • The macro and micronutrients: what are they and what are they for?
  • The five food groups




Module 2: “Quality, variety and quantity: the three musketeers of
our diet. Part 1”
  • Principles of the Mediterranean diet pyramid
  • The importance of the 5 meals in daily lifes




Module 3: “Quality, variety and quantity: the three musketeers of
our diet. Part 2”
  • Healthy eating in daily life: where to start?
  • The effects of our food choices on daily life




Module 4: “Taste, Flavor and Sustainability”
 • What does sustainable diet mean?
 • Organic vs. conventional agriculture



Module 5: “Taste, Flavor and Sustainability: it’s the turn of fruit
and vegetables”
 • Benefits in consuming seasonal fruits and vegetables
 • How many places for fruit in your food day!
 • Taste and vegetables: a good match



Module 6: “Taste, Flavor and sustainability: it’s the turn of legumes”
 • The world of legumes: an interesting discovery!
 • Practical examples of how to increase legume consumption in daily life




Module 7: ”In the jungle of food labels”
 • Packaging and food labels
 • Tips for making informed choices




                                                                            36
     Index      IN-DEPTH CASE STUDIES




Impact measurement approach
A questionnaire measuring adherence to the Mediterranean diet, food habits,
knowledge and attitudes was filled out by 110 students before the intervention, with
a slight drop in respondents after the intervention.

Outcomes
Lessons promoted adherence to the Mediterranean Diet, increased knowledge
about food and nutrition, and mitigated barriers to eating practices, and facilitated
enabling factors. 30% of the students reported an increase in the level of adherence
compared to the beginning of the intervention and a significant increase in the
presence of students in the high adherence-category after the intervention (43%) as
compared to the baseline (24.55%). The consumption of vegetables regularly once
a day increased from 59% to 68%, as did eating legumes more than once a week,
which increased from 54% to 73%.




                                                                                        37
RESOURCES
     Index      RESOURCES




Useful toolkits to develop
food interventions:
FOOD2030 Toolkit for public engagement (2024): A toolkit designed to involve
stakeholders in Food Systems related activities proposing a broad range of tools,
from guidelines that can help co-create new projects, to ideas and props that can
be used during stakeholder engagement events.

FOOD2030 Toolkit for education (2024): A toolkit supporting formal, non-formal,
and informal educators in exploring our complex food systems by covering road
range of topics from planetary health to sustainable diets.

Sustainable Food Places Toolkit: A toolkit offering strategies and processes on
how to build partnerships and strategies in Food Systems.

Foodshift Transition Toolkit (2023): A toolkit showcasing different success stories
of food system innovations that took place in different cities across Europe.

Additional resources on involving experts by experience:
Telling stories and shaping solutions (2020): A toolkit showing techniques,
strategies and best practices to empower people who have lived experience of food
poverty.

Involving experts by experience (2016) A guidebook explaining how to involve
experts by experience in policy influencing activities and events

Additional resources on communication:
Positive communication toolkit (2021): A toolkit exploring how to implement
positive and optimistic communication strategies around environmental and
animal conservation topics

Food citizenship: a communication toolkit (2017): A toolkit for organization in the
agrifood sector aiming to improve their communication towards citizens rather
than consumers.




                                                                                      39
     Index      RESOURCES




Additional resources on developing co-design events:
The power of many (2024): A guide for city officials and policymakers on how to
design co-creation processes involving different stakeholders for environmental
sustainability and social justice related projects.

Getting participation right (and wrong) (2023): blog article showcasing success
and unsuccess stories of recruitment processes in co-design and group decision-
making activities.

Equitable events handbook (2023): A handbook providing guidelines to organize
non-discriminatory, equitable and inclusive events.




                                                                                  40
      Index          RESOURCES




Storytelling as listening method
Storytelling
Storytelling is the practice of using narratives to convey experiences, ideas, and
emotions in a compelling and meaningful way. It helps people connect with
information on a personal level, making complex topics more relatable and
memorable.
Co-creating interventions in the Food Health & Sustainability Sector
Storytelling can play a crucial role in co-designing more inclusive and effective
interventions by connecting people to places, issues, and perspectives they may
not have previously considered.

              When co-creating a community garden, asking participants why they want it
              can reveal diverse needs—one may seek fresh food, another a green space
              for children. These insights might inspire a kids’ gardening workshop. By
              integrating personal stories, organizations can design more impactful programs,
              communicate effectively, and ensure initiatives truly serve the community.


Retrieving useful data and insights
Storytelling can uncover insights that numbers and data often overlook, especially
when participants share their food-related experiences. By comparing different
stories—like those about food access, community gardens, or shared meals—
hidden patterns and challenges emerge, providing a deeper understanding of the
issues and opportunities within food systems and community well-being.

              In school canteens, for example, it could be possible to better understand how
              to change menus to make them more nutritious, healthier and more sustainable
              by asking the kids to draw what they would like to eat as a healthy school meal.
              Then, the canteen nutritionist could compare the drawing to understand which
              elements recur more often and develop a menu starting from this exercise.


Inspiring behaviour change - within the intervention itself
Storytelling can be a powerful catalyst for behaviour change, especially when it is
woven into the intervention itself. By sharing authentic, relatable, and emotionally
compelling stories, people are more likely to connect with new ideas, reflect on
their own behaviours, and feel motivated to change. Here’s how storytelling can
inspire behaviour change within an intervention:

              A storytelling workshop can support the launch of a mobile fresh food market
              in a low-income community by inviting residents to share personal stories
              about their relationships with food. By reflecting on their experiences, people
              build connections, celebrate cultural food traditions, and feel more invested
              in the market. Their stories and recipes could be compiled into a community
              cookbook, reinforcing engagement and making healthy eating feel more
              accessible and relevant. This storytelling approach would drive participation
              and long-term success.



                                                                                                 41
      Index          RESOURCES




In these ways, storytelling doesn’t just serve as a tool for communication—it
becomes an active part of the intervention that inspires and sustains behaviour
change.
Showcasing the impact
Stories effectively capture the real impact of food interventions by showcasing
personal experiences and community perspectives. When individuals share their
narratives—about food access, waste reduction, or improved eating spaces—
patterns emerge, revealing both successes and challenges.

              Storytelling can effectively showcase the impact of a public diner for vulnerable
              groups. Diners could share their experiences through recorded testimonials,
              written reflections, or artwork. One person might describe how the diner
              provided a warm meal when they had nowhere else to turn, while another could
              highlight how it helped them rebuild social connections and confidence. Staff
              and volunteers might share how their interactions with guests deepened their
              understanding of food insecurity and changed their views on poverty and food
              justice. These stories offer valuable insights into the diner’s success and areas
              for improvement, helping to refine services to better serve the community.


Storytelling. How to do it?
Any story has a few elements that are always present:
• Audience: Who is the target for the story (E.g. citizens, policymakers,
  stakeholders, etc.)
• Plot: What happens? What is the arc of action? (E.g. The set up of a community
  garden, lecture on food waste in a school, etc.)
• Setting: Where and when is the story is set? (E.g. Nowadays, in a European
  municipality, etc.)
• Point of view: Who is telling the story? (E.g. A legislator, a farmer, a consumer, etc.)
• Conflict: What drives the story forward? What is the problem that the characters
  are facing? (E.g. Food insecurity, food waste, etc.)

Any story follows a particular scheme that evolves around conflict, as it shows in
the graph below.




                                                         In FEAST, the Living Labs have been
                                                         taught on how to use storytelling in
                                                         their interventions during the first
                                                         Building Capacity Session in April 2024,
                                                         which focused on methodologies and
                                                         mechanisms for co-creating interventions.




                                                                                                     42
     Index       RESOURCES




Community workshop to
co-design solutions for better
access to healthier and more
sustainable food
The FEAST project, funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe program, aims
to support transitions toward healthier and more sustainable diets. Working with
living labs is one of the core elements of FEAST because they promote co-creation
while leveraging the participation of end-users (citizens, including vulnerable
groups) by gathering their real-world insights and local knowledge.
The co-design workshop for Living Labs is designed to actively engage
communities and stakeholders in developing actionable solutions to address food-
related challenges in their communities.

Workshop overview:
The workshop enables participants to collaboratively identify barriers to healthier
and more sustainable eating and design solutions that cater to their specific
community needs. It is based on participatory methods, emphasizing the co-
creation of interventions that encourage better dietary behaviour.


Key components in three rounds:
• Graph over time and dream: Participants visualize how food-related challenges
  have evolved in their community and envision future scenarios.
• Mapping barriers and qualities: Using a cognitive mapping approach,
  participants collaboratively identify barriers to healthier and more sustainable
  food consumption and existing strengths within the community.
• Solution pathways: Groups brainstorm and develop potential interventions,
  make the connection with the bottlenecks and qualities and identify key
  stakeholders for implementation. .




                                                                                      43
      Index      RESOURCES




Outcomes and benefits for Living Labs:
• Identify challenges and opportunities: Through structured exercises,
  participants map bottlenecks and qualities that might be supportive in solving
  the problem and focus on points for improvement.
• Tailored approach: In the workshop the participants create common
  understanding of the challenge the living lab is facing. The workshop can be
  adapted to focus on specific community needs, such as childrens’ nutrition or
  local food environments.
• Co-create solutions: The workshop encourages participants to design practical
  solutions that are feasible and impactful for the community.
• Actionable outcomes: The solution(s) are connected with the bottlenecks and
  qualities. The solutions generated have a strong support base and are directly
  applicable, with a focus on interventions that can be implemented within the
  community. The workshop facilitates an holistic approach to food systems. The
  level of responsibility (micro, meso or macro) is clear.
• Empower local people: The workshop can involve only citizens, but can also
  include a mix of inhabitants (including vulnerable groups) and key stakeholders
  (e.g., policymakers, school officials) or solely stakeholders. It fosters cooperation
  among diverse groups, ensuring that all voices are heard.

How to get involved:
Living Labs interested in running a co-design workshop can use this structured
process to foster healthier and more, sustainable eating within their communities.
FEAST provides resources, including facilitator guidelines, templates, and tools,
ensuring that the workshop is easy to implement.

For more information, see the handbook of the workshop and the outcomes and
insights from FEAST Living Labs report based on workshops that were held during
the FEAST program in different Living Labs across Europe.




                                                                                          44
        Index       RESOURCES




Hack for Food, Hack for Good!
methodology




Berlin Living Lab



Hack for Food Hack for Good! is a hackathon series designed and hosted by
OpenDot from 2022 to 2025 in 5 European cities, with a co-design approach that
harnesses collaborative innovation to address challenges in food and health.

Developed within the framework of OpenDot’s co-design practices, this
methodology emphasizes inclusive, participatory design that brings together
diverse stakeholders - from individuals with specific needs to healthcare
professionals, designers, and researchers - to co-create solutions tailored to
real-world challenges. Through an iterative process of ideation, prototyping,
and testing, it ensures that innovations are practical, scalable, sustainable, and
aligned with users’ lived experiences.

The results were 6 prototypes that addressed different needs in each local context
for different users and vulnerable groups, and institutions or professionals that
work with and for vulnerable populations.

Co-design is at the heart of this methodology. In this process end-users and
stakeholders actively contribute to the design and development of solutions,
ensuring that the outcomes are tailored to real needs. This participatory approach
empowers individuals by valuing their lived experiences, fostering a sense of
ownership, and improving the likelihood of long-term adoption and impact.



                                                                                     45
       Index       RESOURCES




Key principles

•   Inclusion - Engaging all relevant stakeholders, especially those directly affected
    by the challenge, as end-users (vulnerable groups) and “experts of the need”.
•   Networking and Stakeholder Activation - Identifying key actors in the
    ecosystem and facilitating their engagement through formal partnerships
    and shared objectives, including experts and researchers in each field of
    intervention.
•   Prototyping for Validation - Using rapid prototyping to test ideas, processes,
    and products, ensuring feasibility before full implementation.
•   Iteration - Testing solutions in real-world settings, refining them through
    continuous feedback.
•   Sustainability - Ensuring that proposed solutions are practical and aligned with
    long-term goals.
•   Open Knowledge - Open-source sharing of insights and solutions to foster wider
    adoption and adaptation.




Human-Centered Design and Co-design
A fundamental pillar of the “Hack for Food, Hack for Good!” methodology is Human-Centered
Design (HCD), which prioritizes empathy, user engagement, and real-world applicability. Unlike
conventional top-down design approaches, HCD ensures that the end-users are actively involved
throughout the development process, from identifying needs to refining solutions.
HCD is an iterative design methodology focused on understanding users’ experiences,
challenges, and aspirations. It relies on research techniques to immerse in the users’ context to
gather insights and define the problem space - such as interviews, ethnographic observations,
and co-creation workshops to generate insights that guide solution development. HCD then goes
beyond designing for users - it designs with them, ensuring solutions are functional but also
impactful, feasible, meaningful, and sustainable in their specific contexts for specific needs.

Co-design is a subset of HCD and further extends this principle by promoting direct collaboration
between designers and users. This participatory approach not only enhances the relevance of
solutions but also empowers individuals, fostering a sense of ownership and commitment to
the outcomes. Co-design involves multi-stakeholder engagement, where diverse perspectives
contribute to more inclusive and innovative solutions.

By integrating HCD and co-design, this methodology bridges the gap between design expertise
and lived experience, leading to solutions that are more effective, adaptable, and widely accepted
by the communities they serve.




                                                                                                     46
        Index       RESOURCES




The process - from Challenge to Solution, from Concept to Prototype:
organization and implementation.

The methodology was structured in distinct phases (see the following page)

The “Hack for Food, Hack for Good!” initiative applies this methodology to food-
related challenges, particularly focusing on inclusive actions, sustainable food
systems, and nutritional education. The initiative leverages co-design to create
tools, resources, and environments to support specific needs.
The “Hack for Food, Hack for Good!” hackathon series held between 2023 and
2024 for the Feast project generated 6 projects, including analog products and
services (made thanks to digital manufacturing) and digital ones, in the form of
functional and testable prototypes.

The end goal reached is the co-creation of personalized physical tools, specific
methodologies, and interactive digital systems, to support health experts,
caregivers, patients, and people in vulnerable conditions, envisioning a future of
effective food and health innovation through co-design and prototyping.
For further details about the solutions, we refer to the sites of feast2030.eu and
opendot.it




Berlin Living Lab




                                                                                     47
          Index        RESOURCES


From Challenge to Solution, from
Concept to Prototype:                              7. Host a Co-Design Event - the
                                                   Hackathon format
organization and implementation.
                                                   The format comes right from the computer-
                                                   technology field: a short-time event where
                                                   teams of people engage to compete with
1. Set the collaboration with local                each other, to find solutions to one or more
partners                                           “challenges”, with a view to innovation and
It is crucial to construct a network of local      improvement. It also allows people from
partners that will collaborate in the process at   different disciplines to be involved in a
least 12 months before the date of the event       challenge, emphasizing a collaborative mode
                                                   that must express maximum effectiveness to
                                                   lead to a satisfactory solution.

2. Understand the need
From the earliest stages, it is good to            8. Mentoring and Prototyping sessions
actively engage with users and stakeholders,
explaining the process, the roles and the goals    After each event, it is possible to include
                                                   a mentoring or educational session from
                                                   3 months to 12 months (depending on
                                                   the complexity of the project), to enable
3. Host citizen engagement sessions                participants of the winning ideas to develop
                                                   personal skills, develop design systems
Setting collaborations within the local context    and brand-a-like solutions, empower their
is important from the outset, both to prepare      team and communities involved. This helps
for participation in the whole process and to      to design and realize physical and digital
ensure that everyone’s needs and interests are     prototypes of the solutions, using a wide
aligned.                                           range of technologies and digital fabrication
                                                   methods). The emphasis on translating ideas
                                                   into tangible prototypes is a core strength of
                                                   this methodology.
4. Define a thematic and one or more
challenges
This step is dedicated to setting the thematic
boundaries of the project - in collaboration       9. Test and refinement of the solution
with all the stakeholders - to tackle the right    This phase can start during the prototyping: in
challenge, interesting both for the public and     an iterative way, it is useful to test the solution,
the private sectors, the institutions and the      involving primarily end users and experts
communities involved                               and local stakeholders, testing early-stage
                                                   concepts, functionalities and features in real
                                                   environments, incorporating feedback and
                                                   improving designs through repeated sessions;
5. Design of the format of the hackathon           in a second moment test also with end users
event                                              from other contexts.
Considering the participants and the city
context, it is important to adapt timing and
sessions based on the ideal audience, the
                                                   10. Implement the solution
theme, and the challenge.
                                                   After testing, it is possible to modify and
                                                   correct the prototype, deploying a finalized
                                                   solution.
6. Launch open calls and invitations
Launch an open call for participants, designing
it based on the challenge and the possible
                                                   11. Host online and onsite events
and desirable output. The usual audience of
this process can include a very different type     These actions enable to foster engagement
of audience, ranging from young students,          and collaboration during the whole process,
innovators, startuppers, researchers,              and facilitate the test, dissemination and
consultants, or simply curious people.             scalability of the results.

                                                                                                          48
      Index       RESOURCES




Triggering creativity in
participatory processes
Turning ideas into tangible solutions requires a structured yet flexible approach
that allows for both creativity and practicality. Creativity in participatory design is
not just about generating ideas - it’s about guiding innovation through structured
phases of exploration and refinement. And an ideal design journey balances
creative, first, and then practical thinking.
The creative process leverages various ideation techniques to refine initial thoughts
into workable ideas. It’s important to collect the ideas in a free and open way,
engaging all the stakeholders involved, from designers to institutions to final users.
Then, there will be time to select ideas, ensuring that the final ones are not only
innovative but also feasible sustainable, and aligned with real-world needs.


                                 In the first phase, participants expand their thinking,
                                 exploring a wide range of possibilities through
                                 brainstorming, research, and collaborative ideation.
                                 This is the creative stage, where ideas flow freely,
                                 and unexpected connections emerge. There are a
                                 lot of techniques that help structure this exploration,
                                 pushing beyond conventional solutions, and
                                 expanding creative and lateral thinking.


To nominate a few:

              Background Research
              Before diving into ideation, gathering background information is
              crucial. Researching existing studies, case examples, and market
              trends helps teams understand the landscape of their challenge. This
              phase ensures that new ideas are informed, feasible, and built on a
              foundation of knowledge, often leading to unexpected insights and
              innovative connections.

              Mind Mapping
              Mind mapping is a visual technique that encourages non-linear
              thinking. A core idea is placed at the center of a page, with related
              concepts branching outward. This method helps in structuring
              thoughts, connecting seemingly unrelated ideas, and uncovering
              potential opportunities that might not emerge in a traditional
              brainstorming session.




                                                                                           49
     Index       RESOURCES




             Crazy Eights
             This rapid ideation exercise challenges participants to think quickly and
             expansively. A sheet of paper is divided into eight sections, and within
             eight minutes, participants sketch out eight different ideas. The goal
             is not perfection but rather volume-breaking out of habitual thought
             patterns and embracing new possibilities.


                               In the second phase, creativity shifts towards
                               tangible and testable outputs. Here, ideas are
                               refined, evaluated, and selected based on feasibility
                               and impact. This phase transforms abstract
                               concepts into concrete prototypes, ensuring that
                               innovation remains both visionary and applicable.


By alternating between these open-ended explorations and focused refinements,
participatory design ensures that creativity is not only encouraged but also
channelled into meaningful, real-world solutions.




                                                                                         50
      Index       RESOURCES




Place Standard Tool:
Food in My Area - the Food Lens
Location plays a significant role in shaping individual food choices. Factors such
as accessibility, availability, and proximity, all influenced by place, impact how
easily people can purchase healthy food. Additionally, local traditions and culture
shape attitudes and intentions around food, influencing buying preferences.
Beyond individual choices, food also serves a social and economic function within
communities, fostering job opportunities and a sense of belonging. Therefore,
when designing local initiatives to promote healthier and more sustainable food
choices, it is essential to measure both how place affects food access and how
food, in turn, contributes to the character of a place.

The Place Standard Tool (PST) Food Lens is a tailored adaptation of the PST
methodology, originally developed by Public Health Scotland, to facilitate
community discussions about local food environments. Designed for use by both
communities and professionals, this interactive and group -based methodology
helps assess food accessibility in specific areas, whether neighbourhoods, towns,
or parts of cities, across urban, rural, and island settings. By providing participants
with handouts covering 13 themes, the tool encourages users to evaluate the food
environment within a place and its suitability for accessing healthy food for all.
Each theme includes a guiding question to steer discussions, followed by a 7-point
rating scale to evaluate the place. Participants are also asked to identify strengths
and suggest potential improvements for the area. Additionally, each theme provides
optional, non-binding questions to further support reflection and discussion.


The 13 themes to reflect about the local food place:
1. Moving Around: How easy is it to move around my area to get food?
2. Public Transport: What is the public transport like in my area to get to the supermarket,
eat out or get to the local food producers?
3. Traffic and Parking: How does the traffic and parking in the area impact on the food
you buy?
4. Streets and Spaces: Does food play a role in the design of our buildings, streets or
spaces?
5. Play and Recreation/ Natural Spaces: What is the food like in the spaces we play and
socialize in?
6. Facilities and Services: How well do facilities and services in my area provide and
promote good food?
7. Work and Local Economy: What opportunities are there in the area to work, volunteer
or train in food?




                                                                                               51
      Index        RESOURCES




8. Housing and Community: Do the homes in the area meet everyone’s needs around
food and do we have a strong community spirit around food?
9. Social Interaction: how good are the opportunities to enjoy good food when I’m
meeting and spending time with others in my area?
10. Identity and Belonging: To what extent does this area have a positive identity around
food?
11. Feeling Safe: How do I feel about buying and preparing food safely?
12. Care and Maintenance: Is your neighbourhood clean and tidy?
13. Influence and Control: Do people listen to what you say and include you in decision
making?


Benefits and opportunities for Living Labs
The PST-Food Lens is a resource-efficient interactive and group-based
methodology for Living Labs to identify the opportunities to improve the local
food environment and identify priority areas within which to develop actions,
which could take the form of a “local place plan”. Furthermore, the PST-Food Lens
can be a useful monitoring tool to assess differences in the perception of place
before, during and after the implementation of local actions. This facilitates the
measurement of progress and identification of corrective measures that need to be
put in place to adjust the direction of the intervention to achieve desired outcomes.



As part of FEAST, the Cork Living Lab hosted a series of five workshops in the Sláintecare Healthy
Communities – North Cork City, bringing together community organization representatives and
local residents to explore food in their area. The Healthy Cities Coordinator (and member of the
Cork Food Policy Council) guided the consultation process, the results of which will contribute to
the workplan of the recently appointed local Community Food and Nutrition Worker. The insights
gathered will support the food mapping requirement in the area, build local relationships as well
as contributing to shaping the Cork Food Policy Council’s food strategy for Cork City and its
surrounding areas.




                                                                                                     52
GLOSSARY
            Index      GLOSSARY




      Glossary

DEF
      Living lab:            Living Labs: Practice-driven organisations that facilitate and foster
                             open, collaborative innovation and real-life environments or arenas
                             where both open innovation and user innovation processes can be
                             studied and subject to experiments and where new solutions are
                             developed (SCAR, 2023).

DEF
      Vulnerable             Dependent on the context these groups may include children, pregnant
                             or lactating women, indigenous communities, elderly population,
      groups                 farmers, people living in remote areas and people with lower
                             socio-economic status based on education levels and/or income.
                             Conceptually, vulnerable groups can be characterized as those with
                             high risk and low resilience (Exner, et al., 2016).


DEF
      Food                   The physical, economic, political and socio-cultural context in which
                             consumers engage with the food system to make their decisions about
      environment            acquiring, preparing and consuming food (HLPE, 2017).



      For more definitions see: https://feast2030.eu/glossary




                                                                                                     54
www.feast2030.eu   FEAST is co-funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and inno-
                   vation programme under grant agreement number 101060536. Views and opinions
                   expressed are those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the
                   European Union. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held
                   responsible for them.

                   UK participant in FEAST (Good Food Oxfordshire) is supported by Innovate UK grant
                   number 10041509 and the Swiss participant in FEAST (FiBL) is supported by the Swiss
                   State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) under contract number
                   22.00156.
