European cities leading
in urban food systems
    transformation:
   connecting Milan & FOOD 2030
                             Independent
                             Expert
                             Report




              Research and
              Innovation
European cities leading in urban food systems transformation: connecting Milan & FOOD 2030
European Commission
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation
Directorate C — Healthy Planet
Unit C2 — Bioeconomy & Food Systems

Contact    Tatiana Tallarico
Email	Tatiana.Tallarico@ec.europa.eu
           RTD-Planet-Comm@ec.europa.eu
            RTD-PUBLICATIONS@ec.europa.eu
European Commission
B-1049 Brussels

Printed by the Publications Office of the European Union in Luxembourg
Manuscript completed in September 2019

This document has been prepared for the European Commission, however it reflects the views only of the authors, and the European
Commission is not liable for any consequence stemming from the reuse of this publication.
More information on the European Union is available on the internet (http://europa.eu).

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2019

Print                        ISBN 978-92-76-00043-3             doi:10.2777/268251               KI-04-19-174-EN-C
PDF                          ISBN 978-92-76-00042-6             doi:10.2777/1214                 KI-04-19-174-EN-N

© European Union, 2019
Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by
Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39).

For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the copyright of the European Union, permission must be
sought directly from the copyright holders.
Image(s) © Joshua Resnick, #151008920, 2019. Source: stock.adobe.com
                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION




European cities leading
in urban food systems
    transformation:
        connecting Milan & FOOD 2030


       Edited by Andrea Magarini and Elisa Porreca (Milan Food Policy Office)




                        Directorate-General for Research and Innovation
2019                             Directorate C – Healthy Planet                 EN
Contents
Foreword — City of Milan                                                                            3
Foreword — Directorate-General for Research and Innovation                                          4
1. The role of Milan in shaping a new framework for action
   on urban food policies in the global arena                                                       5
   1.1. Milan Urban Food Policy Pact                                                                5
   1.2. How to recognise cities’ advancements on food policies
        through the Milan Pact Awards                                                               7
   1.3. A joint initiative to monitor the progress of the urban food system:
        the FAO–MUFPP monitoring framework                                                          8
2. European regionalisation of the process to raise awareness of
   urban food policies                                                                             11
   2.1. Eurocities Working Group Food                                                              12
   2.2. The European Commission’s Food 2030 framework                                              13
   2.3. Urban experimentation: the Fit4Food2030 city labs                                          16
3. European cities’ actions                                                                        19
   3.1. Overview of 101 urban food practices                                                       20
   3.2. Best practices by European cities                                                          24
   3.3. Milan as a living laboratory: learning from global knowledge
        to shape Milan’s food policy as a beta tester and trendsetter                              33




Section 3.3.1 was written by Carlo Mango and Valentina Amorese (Cariplo Foundation)
Section 2.3 was written by Cristina Paca, Carmen Fenollosa (Ecsite), Jacqueline Broerse, Barbara Regeer,
Alanya den Boer, Kris Kok (VU Amsterdam) and Mads Dahl Gjefsen (OsloMet)




                                                       2
Foreword — City of Milan
The City of Milan is playing a particular role in the spreading of urban food
policies. Milan has pursued new forms of city diplomacy thanks to its innovative
approach to food-system issues, sharing experiences and involving cities from
all over the world. This publication aims to facilitate debate, discussions,
dissemination, mutual learning and the exchange of best practices among
stakeholders in relation to food-policy issues.

The City of Milan has occupied a privileged position in the Milan Urban Food
Policy Pact creation process from the very beginning, because it is aware of the
complex dynamics in food policy development, and has a clear view of the
ongoing debate over the issues relating to food, food policy and circularity that
characterise the EU. This is why Milan can provide an overview of the practices
relating to the food system and food policies that have been spreading all over
Europe since 2014.

This publication is meant to support everyone who is interested in learning
more about the ongoing actions and debates over European food policies at the
urban level. It aims to lay out a road map for anyone who is already working on
food policies, to enhance and enrich already-existing tools and also to help
orient, within a clear framework, those who are approaching this topic for the
first time. Having explored this topic for quite some time, Milan has learned
about the different ways in which cities and citizens can develop their
approaches to food.

In this publication Milan has brought together various practices and activities
relating to urban food policies in Europe. We decided to organise them in
accordance with the main framework of Food 2030, and then to provide some
general recommendations. These recommendations include one that we feel we
must mention here, and that we consider essential to the success of any
initiatives, which has to do with the direct and significant engagement of local
authorities and policymakers. They indeed represent a conditio sine qua non to
achieve success.

Local authorities have committed themselves strongly to transforming their
approach to food in recent years, producing advancements and supporting the
success of existing experiences. The role of political commitment is crucial in
order to both reinforce food-system sustainability and implement meaningful
food governance.

European cities are becoming living laboratories for the originators and
facilitators of innovative policies. Local authorities, acting as urban leaders, are
catalysing changes by supporting the transformation towards inclusive, future-
proof food systems, engaging a wide range of actors for the co-creation of
breakthrough food-policy solutions. Food has always occupied a central role in
our societies and lives, and approaching the topic from the policy perspective
represents a relatively new way to look at the matter.

Anna Scavuzzo
Vice-Mayor of Milan
in charge of Food Policy



                                            3
Foreword — Directorate-General Research & Innovation
The European Union’s ‘Green New Deal’ sets out a farm-to-fork food-system
approach. Farming practices will need to adapt to a changing world; we eat less
healthily than we should, and we need to prepare the food system for climate
change. EU citizens are demanding sustainable food systems that guarantee
food security and health, that support growth and jobs in the food chain and
that sustain our rich and diverse European food culture. Research and
innovation are key to helping redesign food systems and maximising co-benefits
such as nutrition, food safety, the climate, circularity, the environment, social
equity, etc. The European Commission’s Food 2030 initiative has been pivotal in
putting food systems on the agenda by helping to structure and align research
and innovation efforts across the EU. It promotes a systems approach to
complex problems that delivers real impact (and co-benefits) from research and
innovation in the four priority areas of nutrition and health, climate and
sustainability, circularity and resource efficiency, and community empowerment
and jobs.
One of the major global challenges we are facing is unprecedented urban
growth, where over half of the global population is urban and where by 2050 an
additional 2.5 billion people are expected to live in urban areas. Urban areas
currently consume over 70 % of the global food supply. We do not know
enough about balancing this urban–rural interface. In 2017 the Food 2030
Expert Group proposed and defined cities as a new type of food-system partner,
which can act as a multi-objective and multi-actor facilitator. In this respect,
the 2015 Milan Urban Food Policy Pact was identified as a pioneer municipal
project, which has since been strongly supported and followed up by different
Food 2030 actions.
We therefore welcome this timely study from the Milan group, which provides a
useful outline of the diverse and complex urban food-policy actions and
dynamics going on at the European level. It provides a clear view of the
ongoing debate over the issues relating to food, food policy and circularity, and
an overview of the practices relating to the food system and food policies. It
identifies the correct stakeholders and players, and provides a useful road map
and framework for other cities that wish to follow similar routes. In addition,
accelerators, facilitators and living laboratories will become key tools in helping
to identify and push for innovation and progress under the Horizon Europe
programme. This study supplies working examples of their successful
deployment at different scales.
All urban actors need to be more cooperative and flexible towards meeting
common goals. In Horizon Europe this could be facilitated through a food-
system partnership, which can bring diverse communities together to create
cohesion and a common understanding with a view to future calls for proposals
and the broader political implications. Such a partnership can also assist policy
and system science (and tools) in support of decision-making, behavioural
change and policy options; in engaging youth in finding solutions throughout
the research and innovation process; and in promoting food-systems education
and awareness at all levels.

John Bell
Director, DG Research and Innovation — ‘Healthy Planet & Clean Planet’



                                            4
                     Figure 1. MUFPP signatory cities (City of Milan, 2018).



1. The role of Milan in shaping a new framework for
   action on urban food policies in the global arena
Since 2014 Milan has been at the centre of a comprehensive initiative of city
diplomacy in the realm of urban food policies, and has capitalised on both the
experience of bidding to hold the 2015 Universal Exposition (2006-2008) and
the work relating to the content of Expo 2015 itself (2008-2015).
The initiative revolves around four main pillars: urban networking; the
involvement of international bodies; seeding food topics in the existing
international discussion; and project design.
The Milan Urban Food Policy Pact (MUFPP) was signed on 15 October 2015 in
Milan by 113 mayors, and was presented the following day to the UN Secretary
General, Ban Ki-Moon, on the occasion of the World Food Day celebration. It
represents one of the most important legacies of the Milan Universal Exposition
2015 ‘Feeding the Planet’. By signing the pact, mayors from all over the world
voluntarily commit to working together so that their citizens can benefit from
local food systems that are more sustainable, fair, climate friendly, safe,
diverse, resilient, inclusive and able to provide healthy and affordable food to all
people, within a human-rights-based framework.
With the intention of leading the MUFPP, the City of Milan started to define its
own local food policy in order to improve the sustainability of its food system
and test the most inspirational practices from around the world.


1.1. Milan Urban Food Policy Pact
The MUFPP is a voluntary agreement among mayors who are committed to
making urban food systems more sustainable, resilient and equitable. The
announcement of the initiative was made in 2014 at the C40 Summit in
Johannesburg, when the Mayor of Milan launched the proposal for signing the
pact at the Universal Expo 2015. An initial group of 46 cities took on the
preliminary content-drafting activities, guided by a scientific advisory group of
organisations committed to the sustainability of the food system.
The MUFPP is a global commitment by mayors from 200 cities around the world
(October 2019) that considers food to be an entry point into the sustainable



                                                   5
development of growing cities. It represents the main framework for cities and
international stakeholders that are active in the definition of innovative urban
food policies for the management and governance of local food systems. Today,
the pact is a new arena of debate and cooperation among cities and
metropolitan and regional authorities.
The framework for action of the MUFPP is made up of 37 recommended actions
structured into six integrated categories:
   Governance;
   Sustainable Diets and Nutrition;
   Social and Economic Equity;
   Food Production and Urban–Rural Linkages;
   Food Supply and Distribution;
   Food Waste Reduction and Management.
Cities choose specific actions to develop, and whether and how to adapt them
to their specific contexts. The overall objective of the pact is to develop urban
food systems that are sustainable, inclusive, resilient, safe and diverse, and
that provide healthy and affordable food to all people within a human-rights-
based framework. This ambitious goal can be achieved through urban food
policies built on a comprehensive and integrated approach.
Signatory cities gather once a year, at an event that is held in a different Milan
Pact city every year. It is an opportunity to meet, exchange knowledge and
practices, participate in technical workshops, share progress and build
partnerships. Mayors meet each other and get inspired by innovative solutions
implemented in other cities.
The MUFPP works in synergy with several international areas of debate, such as
the New Urban Agenda, the Paris Declaration on Climate Change and the World
Urban Forum, with existing urban networks, such as C40, Eurocities and WHO
Healthy Cities, and with UN bodies, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO), UN-Habitat and SDSN Youth, to connect with the global
agenda for sustainable development.
The Milan Pact brings together cities belonging to different contexts, from North
to global South. Since 2016, on the basis of various forms of regionalisation,
these cities have worked together to overcome challenges, adding value and
content to existing regional networks.

1.1.1. Timeline of milestones

   February 2014. Mayor of Milan launches the idea of a mayors’ pact on
    food.
   September 2015. Start of content definition by 46 cities.
   October 2015. Signature ceremony of the MUFPP involving 113 cities
    worldwide, and presentation to the UN Secretary General.
   September 2016. African signatory cities meeting in Dakar (Senegal).
   October 2016. Second Annual Gathering and Mayors’ Summit of signatory
    cities in Rome (Italy) at the FAO headquarters, and first edition of the Milan
    Pact Awards (MPAs).
   February 2017. European signatory cities’ meeting in Birmingham (United
    Kingdom).



                                           6
   October 2017. Third Annual Gathering and Mayors’ Summit of signatory
    cities hosted by the City of Valencia (Spain), and launch of the MUFPP
    monitoring framework.
   September 2018. Fourth Annual Gathering and Mayors’ Summit of
    signatory cities hosted by the City of Tel Aviv (Israel).
   May 2019. Latin American signatory cities’ meeting in Rio de Janeiro
    (Brazil).
   October 2019. Fifth Annual Gathering and Mayors’ Summit of signatory
    cities hosted by the City of Montpellier (France).

1.2. How to recognise cities’ advancements                       on   food    policies
     through the Milan Pact Awards
The MPAs were launched for the first time in 2016. The initiative was promoted
by the City of Milan and the Cariplo Foundation. The goal of the prizes has
always been to foster the sharing of knowledge between cities all around the
world and to develop an urban accountability tool. Over the four editions of the
MPAs so far (2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019) we have collected 261 practices
relating to urban food policies.

The philosophy behind the MPAs requires winning cities to invest the prize in
city-to-city initiatives that are implemented in order to share their knowledge
with another city participating in the MUFFP. Every year the MPAs assign two
monetary prizes (EUR 15 000 each) and six special mentions. The MPAs have
the ambition of becoming a reference framework for knowledge sharing in the
coming years.

With the MPAs, cities are invited to start cooperating and exchanging knowledge
among themselves and sharing tangible solutions. Since 2015 the experiences
that have been exchanged have helped to define the added value of
decentralised cooperation.

In the last four editions of the awards, 116 food practices and policies were
gathered from European cities (out of 261 practices worldwide), and 10 cities
won prizes or special mentions.

MPA        Winning
                         Category                Practice
EDITION    city
                                                 From food waste to healthy off-
2016       Riga          Food Waste
                                                 season food
                         Sustainable Diets
2016       Birmingham                            Public health
                         and Nutrition
                                                 Political commitment for integrated
2017       Ede           Governance              food governance: the success story
                                                 of Ede
                         Sustainable Diets       Organic conversion project 2002-
2017       Copenhagen
                         and Nutrition           2017
                         Food Supply and         Short food-supply chains in the city
2017       Ljubljana
                         Distribution            municipality of Ljubljana

2017       Bruges        Food Waste              Food-waste prevention and reduction




                                             7
2018        Ghent          Food Waste              Foodsavers Ghent

                           Sustainable Diets       Giocampus project, fostering the
2018        Parma
                           and Nutrition           well-being of future generation

2018        Turin          Food Waste              Towards circular markets

                           Food Supply and
2019        Montpellier                            Structuring the sustainable supply
                           Distribution




1.3. A joint initiative to monitor the progress of the urban food
     system: the FAO–MUFPP monitoring framework
In early 2016 the MUFPP Secretariat and the FAO started developing a monitoring
framework that reflects the six categories of the Milan Pact Framework of Action.
Two surveys were circulated among the pact’s signatory cities to assess their
priorities and the availability of data.

A first set of indicators was presented on 19 October 2017 at the third MUFPP
Annual Gathering in Valencia, and further discussed with signatory cities and their
networks.

In November 2017 a refined list of 44 quantitative and qualitative indicators was
released by the FAO’s team of experts. A methodological guide to help cities and
partners in collecting and analysing the right data for the indicators is being drafted.
For each indicator the guide contains information such as an explanation of the
types of data required and the level of data aggregation; a definition of samples;
and examples of how some cities have already implemented the indicator. The guide
will also highlight the connections with the sustainable development goals (SDGs)
and targets.

1.3.1. The complete set of 44 indicators

Governance

1. Presence of an active municipal interdepartmental government body for
   advisory and decision making of food policies and programmes.
2. Presence of an active multi-stakeholder food policy and planning structure.
3. Presence of a municipal urban food policy or strategy and/or action plans.
4. Presence of an inventory of local food initiatives and practices to guide
   development and expansion of municipal urban food policy and
   programmes.
5. Presence of a mechanism for assembling and analysing urban food system
   data to monitor/evaluate and inform municipal policy making on urban food
   policies.
6. Existence of a food supply emergency/food resilience management plan for
   the municipality (in response to disasters; vulnerabilities in food production,
   transport, access; socio economic shocks, etc.) based on vulnerability
   assessment.



                                               8
Sustainable Diets and Nutrition

7. Minimum dietary diversity for women of reproductive age.
8. Number of households living in ‘food deserts’.
9. Costs of a nutritious food basket at city/community level.
10. Individual average daily consumption of meat.
11. Number of adults with type 2 diabetes.
12. Prevalence of stunting for children under 5 years.
13. Prevalence of overweight or obesity among adults, youth and children.
14. Number of city-led or supported activities to promote sustainable diets.
15. Existence of policies/programmes that address sugar, salt and fat
    consumption in relation to specific target groups.
16. Presence of programmes/policies that promote the availability of nutritious
    and diversified foods in public facilities.
17. Percentage of population with access to safe drinking water and adequate
    sanitation.


Social and Economic Equity

18. Percentage of food insecure households based on the Food Insecurity
    Experience Scale (FIES).
19. Percentage of people supported by food and/or social assistance
    programmes.
20. Percentage of children and youth (under 18 years) benefitting from school
    feeding programmes.
21. Number of formal jobs related to urban food system that pay at least the
    national minimum or living wage.
22. Number of community-based food assets in the city.
23. Presence of food-related policies and targets with a specific focus on socially
    vulnerably groups.
24. Number of opportunities for food system-related learning and skill
    development in i) food and nutrition literacy, ii) employment training and iii)
    leadership.


Food Production

25. Number of city residents within the municipal boundary with access to an
    (urban) agriculture garden.
26. Presence of municipal policies and regulations that allow and promote
    agriculture production and processing in the municipal area.
27. Surface area of (potential) agricultural spaces within the municipal
    boundary.
28. Proportion of total agricultural population — within the municipal
    boundaries — with ownership or secure rights over agricultural land for food
    production, by sex.


                                            9
29. Proportion of agricultural land in the municipal area under sustainable
    agriculture.
30. Number of urban and peri-urban food producers that benefited from
    technical training and assistance in the past 12 months.
31. Number of municipal food processing and distribution infrastructures
    available to food producers in the municipal area.
32. Proportion of local/regional food producers that sell their products to public
    markets in the city.
33. Annual proportion of urban organic waste collected that is re-used in
    agricultural production taking place within municipal boundaries.



Food Supply and Distribution

34. Existence of policies/programmes that address the reduction of GHG
    emissions in different parts of the food supply chain.
35. Presence of a development plan to strengthen resilience and efficiency of
    local food supply chains logistics.
36. Number of fresh fruit and vegetable outlets per 1 000 inhabitants (markets
    and shops) supported by the municipality.
37. Annual municipal investment in food markets or retail outlets providing
    fresh food to city residents, as a proportion of total (investment) budget.
38. Proportion of food procurement expenditure by public institutions on food
    from sustainable, ethical sources and shorter (local/regional) supply chains.
39. Presence of food safety legislation and implementation and enforcement
    procedures.
40. Existence of support services for the informal food sector providing business
    planning, finance and development advice.


Food Waste

41. Total annual volume of food losses & waste.
42. Annual number of events and campaigns aimed at decreasing food loss and
    waste.
43. Presence of policies or regulations that address food waste prevention,
    recovery and redistribution.
44. Total annual volume of surplus food recovered and redistributed for direct
    human consumption.




                                           10
  Figure 2. European cities that are members of the Eurocities Working Group Food (City of Milan, 2019).


2. European regionalisation of the process to raise
   awareness of urban food policies
The European interest in the MUFPP also becomes clear due to the advisory role
the European Commission and the European Committee of the Regions had, in
2015, in the process of defining the content and international dissemination.
The relevance of the MUFPP in Europe, through the active role of the City of
Milan, also increased interactions with different European spaces and the most
innovative European food projects, including TRiFOCAL with WRAP;
Fit4Food2030 with Amsterdam University; the ‘Food in cities’ tender for the
Commission’s Directorate-General (DG) for Research and Innovation;
membership of DG Health and Food Safety’s EU Platform for Food Losses and
Waste; and the ‘Towards a common food policy’ project on the future of the
common agricultural policy with the International Panel of Experts on
Sustainable Food Systems and DG Regional and Urban Policy.
The European Commission’s Food 2030 Expert Group has defined cities as being
a new kind of actor that can make a difference in food-system transformation,
and has proposed cities as an innovative partner for Europe in defining a multi-


                                                       11
objective and multi-actor drive for responsible innovation across the food
system.
In this chapter of the report the European regionalisation process of the MUFPP
will be presented within the frame of reference of Food 2030.


2.1. Eurocities Working Group Food
The Eurocities Working Group Food aims to become a creative hub of food-
policy knowledge, where information, ideas and best practices are shared and
innovative solutions for urban food challenges are shaped. The working group
was launched in 2016 as the European regionalisation structure of the MUFPP.
It represents the starting point for setting up a European framework to
consolidate the effort of Eurocities members and MUFPP cities. The network
organises European advocacy actions, common EU projects and training
sessions for food-policy officers on specific topics for food-policy
implementation.

Eurocities members are food-system leaders. Many cities have established an
urban food policy, enhancing the participation of stakeholders to make a more
sustainable food system. Also, European cities are often more ambitious than
their national governments. With 75 % of Europeans living in urban areas, cities
can generate a significant impact on their food system using their institutional
power.

Some pioneer cities of the Eurocities Working Group Food are creating
innovative food-policy actions based around several main actions, as listed
below.

1. Sustainable diets. Relevant education, health promotion and communication
   programmes, and developing sustainable dietary guidelines.
2. Public procurement. Reorienting school feeding programmes and other
   institutional food services to provide food that is healthy, locally or
   regionally sourced, seasonal and sustainably produced.
3. Urban agriculture. Local food production, strengthening urban and peri-
   urban food production, supporting short food-supply chains.
4. Food Waste Prevention. Saving food by facilitating recovery and
   redistribution for human consumption of food donation.

Since its foundation the Eurocities Working Group Food has organised the
following meetings.

   2017 — Birmingham, on urban innovation.
   2017 — Valencia, during the third MUFPP Annual Gathering.
   2018 — Amsterdam, on food waste.
   2018 — Lyon, on urban agriculture.
   2019 — Ghent, on climate change.
   2019 — Montpellier, on political commitment during the fifth MUFPP
    Annual Gathering.




                                          12
2.1.1. European map of cities, networks and projects

This map was developed to outline the European geography of cities, networks
and projects that are contributing to making the food system more sustainable.
The multilayer map allows the clear geolocation of cities that are members of
the Eurocities Working Group Food, and provides information on the main
European projects they are involved in. It also provides the opportunity to
generally keep track of European activities on food-related topics. Being a very
visual tool that can also incorporate data on each project and city, the map will
provide significant support to cities that are interested in implementing food-
policy actions. The map is available at: https://bit.ly/2mQNsR5

2.2. The European Commission’s Food 2030 framework
Food 2030 was launched after the 2015 Milan World Expo, when the European
Commissioner for Research and Innovation, Carlos Moedas, announced his
intention to launch a food research area by World Food Day 2016. Food 2030 is
a research and innovation (R & I) policy framework of the European
Commission, deployed under its multiannual framework programmes. The
transformation of the food system is not only about production and
consumption, but is also something that requires a broader approach.
Furthermore, everyone is a stakeholder in the necessary food-system
transformation: researchers, Member States, industry, regions, cities and
citizens.

The Food 2030 initiative is developing a framework geared towards highlighting
priorities and creating efficient investments. In this initiative the European
Commission has recognised the challenge of making our food system future-
proof. Several publications and conferences have been dedicated to the need
for a food-systems approach with improved governance. To take further steps
towards implementing Food 2030, DG Research and Innovation has established
a group of experts to appraise the current research landscape relevant to food
systems and to formulate missions that can direct future research and
innovation actions in Europe.

2.2.1. Food 2030 priorities

   Nutrition for sustainable and healthy diets. Ensuring that nutritious
    food and water is available, accessible and affordable for all. It involves
    reducing hunger and malnutrition, ensuring high levels of food safety and
    traceability, reducing the incidence of non-communicable diet-related
    diseases and helping all citizens and consumers adopt sustainable and
    healthy diets for good health and well-being.
   Climate-smart and environmentally sustainable food systems.
    Building climate-smart food systems adaptive to climate change, conserving
    natural resources and contributing to climate-change mitigation. It seeks to
    support healthy, productive and biodiverse ecosystems. Ensuring diversity
    in food systems (including production, processing, distribution and logistics)
    including in terms of cultural and environmental diversity. Natural resources
    (water, soil, land and sea) are used sustainably within the planetary
    boundaries and available to future generations.




                                           13
   Circularity and resource efficiency of food systems. Implementing
    resource-efficient circular-economy principles across the whole food system
    while reducing its environmental footprint. Circularity is applied for
    sustainable and resource-efficient food systems, and food losses and waste
    are minimised throughout.
   Innovation and empowerment of communities. Boosting innovation
    and investment, while empowering communities. A broad innovation
    ecosystem leading to new business models and value-added products,
    goods and services, meeting the needs, values and expectations of society
    in a responsible and ethical way. More and better jobs across the EU,
    fostering thriving urban, rural and coastal economies and communities.
    Through closer partnerships with industry and food producers, markets that
    function in a responsible manner thereby fostering fair trade and pricing,
    inclusiveness and sustainability. Scientific evidence and knowledge from a
    wide diversity of actors underpinning the development and implementation
    of FNS (food and nutrition security)-relevant policies, at all geographical
    scales (local to global).

2.2.2. Implementation tools

‘Food 2030 uses several tools in its research and implementation activities. The
Food 2030 Independent Expert Group gathers experts from around Europe who
are able to bring background knowledge and personal insights to the
implementation of the policy. Eurocities, the City of Milan and Cardiff University
produced the ‘Food in Cities’ study on innovation for the sustainable and
healthy production, delivery and consumption of food in cities, based on a
tender from DG Research and Innovation, mapping cities that were active on
food policy issues in 2016. The EU’s Horizon 2020 framework programme and
the upcoming Horizon Europe are the key programmes for fostering food-
system transformation.

2.2.3. Food 2030 High-Level Event held in Plovdiv (Bulgaria)

The City of Milan, as chair of the Eurocities Working Group Food, and the
consortium of the European Fit4Food2030 project organised the side event
‘Sustainable Food System for European Cities’ at the invitation of the
European Commission. The event was designed to be a workshop about cities’
experiences in the field of food-system transformation. The fruitful debate
involved European Commission officers, researchers and city officers. During
the discussion participants were invited to work with the main tools used to
define the elements of success of food-policy actions and to assess the content
of these actions. The tools were defined by the Fit4Food2030 consortium as a
set of criteria with which to assess city cases, and they were linked to the six
MUFPP categories.

Among the participants at the High-Level Event held in Plovdiv in June 2018,
a delegation from Milan (city and Cariplo Foundation) was there to advocate on
the added value of cities as game changers when talking about food-system
transformation. For the first time at EU level, cities were mentioned as being a
new kind of actor that should have a stronger role in Europe, integrated into a
higher institutional level within the EU along with the Commission and the



                                           14
Member States. This innovative role emerged from the conclusions of the expert
groups, in the declaration and in the call for action.

The Food 2030 Expert Group defined cities as a new kind of stakeholder that
can make a difference in the transformation of the food system and proposed
them as an innovative partner for Europe in the definition of a multi-objective
and multi-actor drive for responsible innovation across the food system. Cities
and other local authorities need to introduce a proactive and evidence-based
food policy that creates healthy, sustainable urban environments to make
healthy and sustainable choices appealing to consumers. Cities should make
sure that their neighbourhoods are connected to the surrounding peri-urban
areas for a healthy lifestyle. It was also highlighted that multiparty innovation
should be an important part of urban food policies.

The Food 2030 Plovdiv Declaration promotes, together with the European
Commission and Member States, an agenda for future-proof food systems that
will have important positive effects on Europeans in terms of healthier lives,
cultural and societal benefits for urban and rural communities, a cleaner
environment, more sustainable production and consumption, lower import
dependency and more vibrant enterprises. The transformation of our food
systems is an opportunity to build new and stronger partnerships and to
develop improved approaches, technologies and business models that
concurrently place environmental sustainability, health and inclusion at their
centre. This can be achieved by fostering place-based innovative food systems
in rural and urban areas that provide job opportunities, enhance prosperity and
wellbeing and empower communities. Cities are also quoted in the seventh
point of the call for action to ‘stimulate European regions and cities to
implement novel solutions and showcase good practices’.

2.2.4. ‘People’s food — people’s health’ conference and Food 2030
Workshop

The conference ‘People’s Food — People’s Health: Towards healthy and
sustainable European food systems’ was organised under the Austrian
Presidency of the Council of the European Union and held in Vienna (Austria) in
November 2018. It was the occasion for the workshop ‘Food 2030: Research
and innovation driving food systems for health’, co-organised by DG Research
and Innovation and DG Health and Food Safety. The main focus of the
conference was to develop a dialogue on concrete solutions to make a healthy
and sustainable diet available, affordable, acceptable and appealing for all.

Along the same lines, the Food 2030 Workshop aimed at gathering
stakeholders to discuss the role of R & I in driving food-system transformation,
with a particular focus on nutrition for sustainable and healthy diets. The City of
Milan was present at the event, represented by the Vice-Mayor in charge of
Food Policy, to give the benefit of its experience as a municipality and to
highlight the momentum of the MUFPP. A major outcome of the discussion was
the recognition of the role of public procurement in addressing healthy diets and
nutrition, focusing on the need for innovative ways of provision and
consumption to develop nutrition-sensitive food systems. Cities can play a
strategic role in shaping the consumption habits of large numbers of people



                                           15
through their public procurement, from school canteens to care homes for the
elderly.

2.2.5. Food 2030 at the High-Level Conference in Bucharest (Romania)

The High-Level Event held during the Romanian Presidency of the Council
explored ‘Circularity and Resource Efficiency in Food Systems’. Within this
framework Food 2030 set up a workshop to create a supportive environment for
establishing new collaborations in the field of agri-food research. The occasion
was used to strengthen collaboration with Eastern Europe and other regions in
order to build up an efficient and effective European food system.

The main aims of the event were to raise awareness about sustainable
production and consumption, to minimise food waste and to transform agri-food
by-products and residues into new raw materials for various purposes using an
environment-friendly approach. The City of Milan participated in the event, with
its food-policy coordinator presenting Milan’s experience.

2.3. Urban experimentation: the Fit4Food2030 city labs
The Fit4Food2030 project (2017-2020) is a Horizon 2020-funded project that
supports the European Commission in implementing the Food 2030 policy
framework.

The project aims to establish a sustainable, multistakeholder, multilevel
platform — the Food 2030 Platform — made up of three interlinked structures:

   14 city labs (also referred to as food labs), built around science centres,
    museums and science shops that develop and implement hands-on
    (in)formal training sessions to build the competences of students and
    professionals, bringing a wide variety of actors together in the process;
   11 national policy labs that mobilise food-system stakeholders in order to
    align R & I policies and investment schemes; and
   an EU think tank that links project activities with the European Commission
    and shapes the field via policy briefs.

The project is built around two main ideas: a holistic food-systems approach
and responsible research and innovation (RRI).

In line with the increased recognition that traditional models that focus purely
on food production or linear models such as food-supply or value chains are not
appropriate to represent the full complexity of the food system, the project
works with the notion of adaptive food systems. This implies taking into account
their complex dynamics, their multifunctional and multi-actor character and the
multitude of problem perceptions, knowledge gaps, values and visions for
future-proofing food systems. The concept of RRI can help tackle this, as its
processes and requirements aim to align the wide range of actors (consumers,
citizens, farmers, policymakers, businesses) and activities involved in R & I
processes for more desirable, sustainable and acceptable future outcomes. This
section zooms in on the model of urban experimentation that currently informs
the actions of 14 city labs across the European Union.



                                          16
2.3.1. City-lab trajectories

Adopting the food-system approach and RRI, the city labs are tackling the
challenge of implementing bottom-up transformation. This approach requires a
high level of experimentation and the delivery of three intermediary objectives:

   building sustainable multistakeholder networks;
   developing a common vision while acknowledging different perspectives;
    and
   ensuring a learning process that is broad and reflexive.

While the trajectories of individual labs reflect the diversity of conditions found
across cities and regions, all activities are based on continuous engagement of
stakeholders and face-to-face multistakeholder workshops, along a shared
timeline.

2.3.2. Actors and visions

City labs started with an iterative actor analysis to understand which food-
related actors are active in their contexts, including an estimation of food
actors’ levels of power and interest, and special attention for groups that are
under-represented in the existing networks and initiatives. Mobilising the actors
required tailored communication strategies and sufficient incentives for
participation.

One of the first endeavours in the labs was a process of shared vision
development, chosen as it can both generate compelling statements of
preferred futures and act as a starting point for thinking about concrete
recommendations and transformations. Multistakeholder dialogues focused on:
(1) visions of a future-proof food system; (2) visions of the role of R & I
towards a future-proof food system; and (3) visions on the competences
(knowledge, attitude and skills) required for individuals engaged in R & I
processes for a future-proof food system.

2.3.3. Understanding the food system

Fit4Food2030 has adapted tools to support the city labs and the broader Food
2030 platform in the analysis of the food system and to identify leverage points
where the current state of things can be transformed. The model is built around
the following three concepts, used during lab workshops to co-develop local
food-system knowledge and understanding.

   Trends. Large-scale developments influencing food-systems R & I.
   Showcases. R & I initiatives or funding programmes that have contributed,
    or are contributing, to food-systems R & I developments.
   Breakthroughs. Significant R & I developments in the field of food and
    nutrition security, potentially resulting in structural changes in food
    systems, making them more sustainable and resilient.




                                           17
2.3.4. Facilitating learning between the labs

With 14 city labs and 11 policy labs, a central goal of Fit4Food2030 is to make
sure that their efforts continue after the project and inspire new initiatives. To
that end, a special emphasis is placed on stimulating shared and interactive
learning between individual cities and labs so that a community of practice can
be established across Europe. Learning is fostered at regular in-person
meetings and training sessions that equip lab coordinators with materials and
resources to use locally. In addition, regular virtual meetings inspired by the
dynamic learning agenda methodology allow each individual lab coordinator to
present current challenges and barriers in their lab activities and benefit from a
supportive community — a space where they can be open about the planning
process in their city or region.

2.3.5. Action planning for transformation

To focus activities around a concrete output and ensure meaningful results that
could strengthen the community, all city labs focused on at least one
contribution with the potential to accelerate transformation: the co-
development of a set of educational modules to stimulate competence
development, which is crucial for real transformative change. Both current
professionals (such as researchers, social entrepreneurs and journalists),
professionals-to-be (students of all levels) and citizens at large are the targets
of this action, and 17 modules are currently under development based on
visioning results, local knowledge and lab-specific expertise. Competences
tackled include systems, futures, values, strategic thinking, collaboration, and
problem-solving.

The reconnection of local food-system actors in the city labs is also taking place
around other concrete actions such as R & I agendas and support for food-
policy processes, action plans and partnership building in several different
ways.

The first group of seven city labs has already been supplemented by seven new
recruits, the experiences of which will strengthen the potential of project tools.
The project is streamlining its understanding of learning, replication and scaling
up, and will launch its resources after this extensive pilot process.




                                           18
             Figure 3. European cities presented in this chapter (City of Milan, 2019).




3. European cities’ actions
European cities are key actors in prompting changes towards a more
sustainable food system under the international frameworks of the MUFPP,
SDGs and Food 2030. They can exploit their institutional power to drive
innovation in food systems thanks to their direct competences, with municipal
bodies and urban actors being involved in all stages of the food system
(production, transformation, logistics, distributions, consumption and waste).
Europe is the most active region in the world in this regard due to its close
partnership with an existing network of European cities that have decided to
establish a dedicated working group on food policy. In this part of the report we
will provide a general overview of all the cases gathered between 2015 and
2018, a description of eight best practices and an in-depth analysis of the case
of Milan as a food-policy trendsetter. All of the analyses are organised under the
framework of the four priorities of Food 2030.




                                                    19
3.1. Overview of 101 urban food practices
The basket from which the practices were selected is global and takes into
consideration the experiences gathered over the last 4 years (2015-2018): 68
by the City of Milan and the Cariplo Foundation through the MPAs (first three
editions) and 33 by Eurocities through the call for practices from different
Working Group Food meetings. This overview was explored during a workshop
involving 15 selected officers of the City of Milan (Food Policy Office, MUFPP
Secretariat and EU Affairs Unit) and the Cariplo Foundation (research, social
and environmental areas) who are engaged with food-policy actions on a day-
to-day basis. In the workshop the basket of 101 practices was analysed: on the
one hand the potential for impacts on each Food 2030 priority was evaluated
(with a range from 1 to 5), on the other hand the shift towards stakeholder
engagement, co-creation processes, citizen-science interest, business model
definition and circular-economy potentiality
was analysed (with an estimation of the
potential expressed by ‘yes’ or ‘no’). The
main results of this exercise are presented
here, along with the considerations
gathered from the participants.

Overall, we can say that up to now the
majority of practices in the EU that are
associated with urban food-policy issues
deal with topics such as food waste,
sustainable diets and nutrition, and
governance. The latter is a cross-cutting
element that encompasses three out of
four of the Food 2030 priorities. In
addition, our analysis indicates that circular
practices tend to relate strictly to food
waste, whereas practices that come under
the nutrition category relates strictly to
diets. The practices associated with climate
are more diverse in terms of topics. More
specifically, the following can be noted.

   The practices relating to circularity have, since the beginning, tended to
    engage different stakeholders, and are well equipped in terms of co-
    creation. These experiences tend to be weaker in terms of citizen science
    and replicability (business model). Circular practices are not surprisingly the
    most important in terms of a circular-economy approach.
   Practices associated with climate are not observed very frequently,
    nonetheless from what we could see they are lacking in terms of both
    citizen science and co-creation.
   Practices relating to innovation, which were the second most numerous
    after the topic of circularity, perform well in terms of stakeholder
    engagement and co-creation, while in line with the climate topic these
    practices are weak in terms of citizen science and replicability (business
    model). These practices are also interesting because of the attention they
    pay to circularity.




                                            20
   Finally, with regard to nutrition practices we once again saw strong
    engagement on the part of stakeholders in parallel with not particularly high
    levels of co-creation, citizen science and replicability. In this case, the
    circular approach also seems to be rather weak.

In conclusion, food-policy practices tend to include stakeholders and are quite
active in terms of co-creation and the implementation of a circular-economy
approach. Importantly, they are not constructed to be replicated but tend to be
strictly attached to the context and specificity of local circumstances. Finally, we
noted widespread difficulties in valuing citizen science. This is noticeable
especially considering the great efforts made by the EU over the past several
decades to give new impetus to engagement and citizen science.




Figure 4. Relationships among the MUFPP categories with the four Food 2030 priorities (City of Milan 2019).




This is a preliminary set of recommendations and we still need to complete,
discuss and improve them. They are aimed at city officers throughout the
world, and in particular at EU cities and authorities, including the European
Commission.

1. In order to have an impact and to be effective, food-policy practices require
   the engagement of local authorities.
2. Food-policy practices are still perceived as a contingent experience and are
   not yet associated with an easily replicable business model.
3. Food-policy practices engage different stakeholders, however in light of the
   lack of attention towards citizen science it seems possible to argue that they
   might not value each stakeholder in the same way.
4. A large variety of food topics in cities can be connected to other European
   drivers (national governments, EU policies, urban networks) to increase
   their impact.




                                                        21
3.1.1. Table of cities’ analysed actions

N    City            Country       Source   Year   Food 2030     Cat   Title
1    Amsterdam       Netherlands   MPAs     2017   Circularity   GOV   Online platform for mapping Amsterdam food
                                                                       system stakeholders
2    Amsterdam       Netherlands   WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Instock initiative
3    Athens          Greece        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Athens biowaste programme
4    Barcelona       Spain         WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Waste prevention plan
5    Bari            Italy         MPAs     2017   Circularity   FW    Avanzi Popolo 2.0 / People’s leftovers 2.0
6    Bologna         Italy         WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Community fridges
7    Bordeaux        France        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Collection of biowaste in Bordeaux hotels by
                                                                       Les Détritivores
8    Bruges          Belgium       MPAs     2017   Circularity   FW    Food-waste prevention, reduction and
                                                                       management
9    Burgas          Bulgaria      WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Biowaste collection in supermarkets and
                                                                       hotels
10   Dublin          Ireland       WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Eastern-Midlands regional waste management
                                                                       plan 2015-2021
11   Edinburgh       UK            WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Zero waste policy food kitchens
12   Genova          Italy         MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    Ricibo network as a smart food policy best
                                                                       practice
14   Ghent           Belgium       MPAs     2018   Circularity   FSD   Platform for short supply chain products
13   Ghent           Belgium       MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    Foodsavers Ghent
15   Gothenburg      Sweden        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Model for reduced food waste
16   Helsinki        Sweden        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Biowaste collection to produce compost and
                                                                       energy
17   Katowice        Poland        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Redistribution of food surpluses
18   Linköping       Sweden        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Waste-to-energy (WTE) plant
19   Ljubljana       Slovenia      WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Raise your voice against food waste
20   London          UK            WG       2018   Circularity   FW    FoodSave programme
21   Lyon            France        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Small retailers food waste recovery
22   Malmo           Sweden        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Bio-waste for bio fuel of public transportation
                                                                       Awareness Biogas
23   Milan           Italy         WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Experiences on food losses and waste
                                                                       management
24   Milan           Italy         MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    A comprehensive food policy to tackle food
                                                                       waste
25   Modena          Italy         MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    Modena community projects against food
                                                                       waste
26   Oslo            Norway        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Raising awareness campaigns
27   Oss             Netherlands   MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    Fight against food waste
28   Paris           France        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Recovery and redistribution of safe and
                                                                       nutritious food to people in need
29   Prague          Czech         WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Biowaste collection for biogas and compost
                     Republic
30   Riga            Latvia        MPAs     2016   Circularity   FW    From food waste to healthy, off-season food
32   s-              Netherlands   MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    Agreement to reduce food waste
     Hertoghenbosh
31   s-              Netherlands   MPAs     2018   Circularity   S     Big data for better food
     Hertoghenbosh
33   Sofia           Bulgaria      WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Separate collection and treatment of biowaste
34   Stavanger       Norway        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Restevenn campaign
35   The Hague       Netherlands   WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Community composting
36   Tilburg         Netherlands   WG       2018   Circularity   FW    ZuiderZwam
37   Toulouse        France        WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Recovery of food losses at Rio Loco music
                                                                       festival
39   Turin           Italy         MPAs     2017   Circularity   FW    Porta Palazzo organic project
38   Turin           Italy         MPAs     2018   Circularity   FW    POPP (Progetto Organico Porta Palazzo):
                                                                       towards circular markets
40   Utrecht         Netherlands   WG       2018   Circularity   FW    Reusing coffee waste for growing oyster
                                                                       mushrooms
41   Venice          Italy         MPAs     2017   Circularity   FW    Progetto R.E.S.A.



                                                          22
42   Amsterdam       Netherlands   MPAs   2018   Climate      FSD   Mapping the food system: Last mile
                                                                    distribution local hotel and catering industry
43   Basel           Switzerland   WG     2018   Climate      FW    Living lab
44   Bordeaux        France        MPAs   2016   Climate      FP    Système Alimentaire Terriorial social
45   Copenhagen      Denmark       MPAs   2017   Climate      SDN   Organic conversion project 2002-2017
46   Frankfurt       Germany       MPAs   2017   Climate      GOV   Klimagourmet Network
47   Ljubljana       Slovenia      MPAs   2016   Climate      FSD   Bee path
48   Ljubljana       Slovenia      MPAs   2016   Climate      FSD   Short food supply chains in the City of
                                                                    Ljubljana
49   Ljubljana       Slovenia      WG     2017   Climate      FP    Attention to rural development and urban
                                                                    gardens
50   Lyon            France        MPAs   2018   Climate      GOV   Increased supply of organic food to local
                                                                    restaurants
51   Madrid          Spain         MPAs   2017   Climate      GOV   Urban community gardens network: School of
                                                                    food citizenship
52   Molfetta        Italy         MPAs   2016   Climate      FSD   Fish all days
53   Nantes          France        MPAs   2018   Climate      FP    Turning wastelands into productive lands
     Métropole
54   Tirana          Albania       MPAs   2017   Climate      GOV   Improving our citizens’ lives and food security
55   Valencia        Spain         MPAs   2018   Climate      FSD   Políticas de revitalización de la tira de contar
56   Valencia        Spain         MPAs   2018   Climate      GOV   An observatory to defend the green belt
57   Venice          Italy         MPAs   2018   Climate      FW    Agreement for testing new green fuel for public
                                                                    transport
58   Vienna          Austria       MPAs   2018   Climate      FSD   Ecological public procurement
61   Almere          Netherlands   MPAs   2017   Innovation   FW    Coalition extraordinary Almere
59   Almere          Netherlands   MPAs   2017   Innovation   GOV   Oosterwold: urban agriculture
60   Almere          Netherlands   MPAs   2017   Innovation   SEE   Onze-(Our) allotment under glass
62   Bordeaux        France        MPAs   2018   Innovation   GOV   Conseil consultatif de gouvernance alimentaire
                                                                    durable
64   Bruges          Belgium       MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   Food lab
63   Bruges          Belgium       MPAs   2017   Innovation   GOV   Guidelines on sustainable food on events
66   Ede             Netherlands   MPAs   2017   Innovation   GOV   Political commitment for integrated food
                                                                    governance: the success story of Ede
65   Ede             Netherlands   MPAs   2018   Innovation   GOV   Measuring change: how Ede municipality
                                                                    developed a tool to monitor improvement in its
                                                                    local food system.
67   Ghent           Belgium       MPAs   2018   Innovation   GOV   A co-creative governance approach
68   Gothenburg      Sweden        WG     2017   Innovation   GOV   Environmental considerations driving a
                                                                    comprehensive food strategy
69   Ljubljana       Slovenia      MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   Strategy for rural development of the
                                                                    Municipality of Lubljana 2014-2020
70   Lyon            France        MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   Sustainable food for all
71   Milan           Italy         WG     2017   Innovation   GOV   Seeking cooperation across department and
                                                                    stakeholders’ involvement
72   Nantes          France        MPAs   2017   Innovation   FP    Territorial food project of the Nantes
     Métropole                                                      Metropolis
73   Parma           Italy         MPAs   2018   Innovation   SEE   Youth in action for a sustainable and creative
                                                                    gastronomy
74   Rotterdam       Netherlands   WG     2017   Innovation   FSD   A strong focus on economic development
75   s-              Netherlands   MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   Agrifood capital triple helix
     Hertoghenbosh
76   s-              Netherlands   MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   Grow campus
     Hertoghenbosh
77   Turin           Italy         MPAs   2016   Innovation   GOV   The right to food in the statute of the City of
                                                                    Turin
78   Utrecht         Netherlands   MPAs   2018   Innovation   SEE   Food as a means of reducing inequalities
79   Valladolid      Spain         WG     2018   Innovation   FSD   City food policy
80   Venice          Italy         MPAs   2017   Innovation   GOV   ‘Citizens In…deed!’ project
81   Venice          Italy         MPAs   2017   Innovation   SEE   Off-course map project
82   Amsterdam       Netherlands   MPAs   2016   Nutrition    SDN   Healthy lifestyles
83   Basel           Switzerland   MPAs   2016   Nutrition    SDN   Sustainable catering at the University of Basel
84   Basel           Switzerland   MPAs   2016   Nutrition    SDN   A healthy bodyweight for children and youths
86   Birmingham      UK            MPAs   2016   Nutrition    SDN   Public health




                                                       23
85    Birmingham      UK            MPAs   2017   Nutrition   SDN   Nutrition smart cities: a Birmingham–India
                                                                    initiative (BINDI)
87    Cremona         Italy         MPAs   2017   Nutrition   SDN   Cremona: a model for a new sustainable
                                                                    school canteen
88    Dénia           Spain         MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Strengthening of the local food ecosystem
                                                                    through healthy nutrition and sustainable
                                                                    gastronomy
89    Ghent           Belgium       MPAs   2017   Nutrition   SDN   A multifaceted approach to sustainable school
                                                                    meals
90    Lisbon          Portugal      WG     2017   Nutrition   SDN   Healthy food and social considerations
91    Oss             Netherlands   MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   De Wereldburger
92    Pamplona        Spain         MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Direct purchase for improved diets in schools
94    Parma           Italy         MPAs   2016   Nutrition   SDN   Food app — family daily meal planning
                                                                    assistant for healthy, nutritious and tasty ideas
                                                                    for good and sustainable meals
93    Parma           Italy         MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Giocampus project: fostering the well-being of
                                                                    future generations
95    Riga            Latvia        MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Riga Central Market — a place for developing
                                                                    healthy eating habits
96    s-              Netherlands   MPAs   2016   Nutrition   FSD   Kitchen heroes
      Hertoghenbosh
97    Tirana          Albania       MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Change of food menu in kindergartens and
                                                                    nurseries of Tirana
99    Turin           Italy         MPAs   2016   Nutrition   SEE   Soup kitchens
98    Turin           Italy         MPAs   2016   Nutrition   SDN   I made the menu
100   Torres Vedras   Portugal      MPAs   2018   Nutrition   SDN   Sustainability programme school feeding
101   Villanueva de   Spain         MPAs   2017   Nutrition   SDN   Healthy and sustainable feeding in the school
      la Cañada                                                     menus in Villanueva


3.2. Best practices by European cities
Connected to each Food 2030 priority are several Milan Pact recommended
actions that European cities are now designing and implementing. For each
priority, two cases were selected as the contribution by eight cities to the
localisation of this European framework. In the following pages we selected
eight European best practices coming from cities that were awarded monetary
prizes or special mentions in any of the editions of the MPAs. The aim is to
provide a significant overview of how cities are able to put into practice different
approaches to food-system issues and implement the Food 2030 framework as
an accountability tool to assess urban food practices.

     Nutrition — Birmingham and Copenhagen. A shift in diets (involving a
      rising demand for protein, staple foods sometimes shipped from remote
      locations, malnutrition and hunger from macro/micronutrient shortages), an
      increase in obesity and a rise in non-communicable diseases from unhealthy
      diets make up the current global picture for nutrition.
     Climate — Ljubljana and Riga. Building climate-smart food systems that
      are adaptive to climate change, conserving natural resources and
      contributing to climate-change mitigation, particularly developing a disaster
      risk reduction strategy.
     Circularity — Bruges and Ghent. Implementing resource-efficient
      circular-economy principles across the whole food system while reducing its
      environmental footprint. Circularity is applied to sustainable and resource-
      efficient food systems, and food losses and waste are minimised
      throughout.
     Innovation — Ede and Bordeaux. Boosting innovation and investment,
      while empowering communities. A wide-ranging innovation ecosystem
      leading to new business models and added-value products, goods and


                                                         24
   services, meeting the needs, values and expectations of society in a
   responsible and ethical way.

During the Food 2030 side event ‘Sustainable Food System for European Cities’
in Plovdiv, the experts participating in the workshop examined the eight city
cases, providing an in-depth analysis of the level to which they matched the
Food 2030 priorities and other criteria, i.e. sustainability dimensions, actors
involved, generic impact and scale.

3.2.1. Nutrition — Birmingham: Public health against obesity

In Birmingham 25 % of children are obese by the time they leave primary
school. The Birmingham Childhood Obesity Partnership is leading a coordinated
effort to impact on childhood obesity at all levels. The project includes policy
change, partnerships, communications and specific interventions. Since signing
the Milan Pact, Birmingham has been exploring and implementing innovative
approaches to tackle childhood obesity, improve health and tackle health
inequality.

Birmingham City Council is involved in several initiatives to tackle childhood
obesity through work focusing on the food environment rather than the
individual. This work includes the following steps.

1. Implementing an action plan to increase the usage of Healthy Start
   vouchers. These vouchers are for pregnant women and low-income families
   with children aged 0-4, and are redeemed in shops for milk, fruit and/or
   vegetables. Current uptake is 70-75 %. The plan is to increase registration
   and usage to 85 % as way of tackling health inequality.
2. Hosting a Birmingham University National Institute for Health Research
   fellow who is coordinating action with local retailers to promote the
   purchase of fruit and vegetables, focusing efforts in the most deprived
   communities; and working with schools to measure the impact of physical-
   activity interventions and food choice in school canteens.
3. Working with the innovative social enterprise Shift to create healthier food
   environments. Poorer families are turning to hot, pre-prepared food more
   often as it provides the perfect solution to putting a meal on the table with
   the life pressures they experience. But this food is currently high in fat,
   sugar and salt, comes in large portions and was designed as an occasional
   treat. Shift and Birmingham City Council are piloting ‘No more same old
   takeaway, proper dinner for you and the kids, delivered to your door’ to
   provide a healthier alternative.
4. Engaging in the national ‘Peas Please’ campaign led by the Food Foundation.
   Birmingham City Council and partners have committed to several pledges to
   increase the availability of vegetables, including increasing the number of
   portions in school meals.
5. Taking part in a Smart Cities initiative called BINDI. The Food Foundation is
   facilitating a Nutrition Smart Cities initiative that involves the development
   of policies and practices through a learning partnership between
   Birmingham, United Kingdom and Pune, India to tackle all forms of
   malnutrition.
6. Commissioning a crowdfunding campaign to support and fund innovative
   community-based health and well-being projects.


                                          25
7. Working with commissioning and procurement officers to encourage
   healthier, more sustainable public procurement relating to food.

The systemic response to childhood obesity set up by the municipality presents
several learning points: through a partnership approach, the group brought
together a range of organisations that had not worked together previously;
crowdfunding demonstrated how it is possible to raise funds and amplify public-
sector funds for social, health and well-being projects; the food projects/pilots
take place in areas of multiple deprivation/need to address social and economic
equity.

3.2.2. Nutrition — Copenhagen: 90 % organic food procurement

Since 2002 the Municipality of Copenhagen has had a food strategy that aims to
use 90 % organic ingredients in the meals of the whole city’s public food
system. An average rate of 88 % was reached in 2016. The 90 % organic
strategy has been a dual effort of both training and upskilling kitchen staff, and
simultaneously restructuring the methods of procurement to ensure the supply
of quality organic ingredients.

The organic conversion of approximately 900 kitchens across the city has been
undertaken by departments within the municipality, with the help of various
consultants and trainers. The main idea behind the strategy is to train kitchen
staff in cooking techniques so that they are able to plan their menus sustainably
and cook food from scratch, as opposed to using processed and pre-prepared
food. The city has invested EUR 5.5 million in knowledge, education and
counselling to facilitate the change (1.6 % of the total food-procurement
budget). The task was to carry out this conversion within the existing budgets.

The city has put a great deal of effort into ensuring that the organic transition in
the kitchens will be supported by quality organic procurement and tenders that
encourage the market to develop the organic and sustainable parts of their
product ranges. Copenhagen organises four ‘market dialogue’ meetings
annually prior to tender, to ensure supply and gain knowledge of possibilities in
the market, at which officers discuss visions, upcoming political developments
and future demands. As a direct result, there has been a professionalisation of
the organic supply lines for canteens, schools, hospitals and nursing homes,
and increased diversity in the products offered.

The organic conversion can be done by adapting consumption and production in
the kitchen. This process of change will entail a variation in the produce and the
nutritional composition. In Copenhagen they call it a ‘conversion of heads and
saucepans’.

In 2007 the City of Copenhagen established the Copenhagen House of Food, an
independent, non-commercial foundation to improve the quality of meals
offered by the city to its citizens and create a healthy, happy and sustainable
public food culture.

Data on the school canteen service
80 000 daily meals, 40 000 daily dinners
7 375 tonnes of food procurement, 142 tonnes weekly


                                            26
1 100 kitchens in 925 locations, 1 700 kitchen staff
EUR 40 300 000

3.2.3. Climate — Ljubljana: Bee path for urban biodiversity

Two thirds of the total surface area of the Municipality of Ljubljana are the so-
called rural areas, which include 826 active farms, each covering approximately
7 hectares. In its rural development strategy for 2014-2020, the Municipality of
Ljubljana set as its first and most fundamental objective the premise to ‘ensure
quality agriculture and forestry goods from a preserved environment, with the
aim of self-sufficiency of Ljubljana’. By doing so, the municipality ensures food
sovereignty and unburdens the environment by using short food-supply chains,
while enhancing the food security of the urban population.

To ensure self-sufficiency, the city recognised the importance of pollinators and
their connection with food producers. This action is particularly relevant for the
Municipality of Ljubljana, which accounts for 3 % of all Slovenian beekeepers,
managing 4 500 bee colonies. In 2015, Ljubljana decided to involve the
beekeepers of the city in the Bee Path project, with the aim of highlighting their
key role in food production and self-sufficiency.

The Bee Path was designed and opened in 2015. The path was realised with an
interdisciplinary approach, presenting beekeeping from different perspectives.
Visitors learn about the importance of bees for human survival and for food
security, and the importance of honey in the daily diet. The project also
provides visitors with a historical perspective, presenting the heritage of
beekeeping in the city. The route involves various stakeholders, including
educational and cultural institutions, institutions related to health, businesses,
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and, of course, beekeepers. Their main
task is to ensure that their activities associated with the Bee Path raise
awareness and inform city residents about the importance of bees in the city.

Ljubljana protects the environment in a way that is friendly to bees, for
example by planting honey plants in public spaces and promoting the activities
of beekeepers’ associations. Additionally, Ljubljana has prepared educational
programmes for children in primary school and kindergarten, emphasising the
importance of education for youngsters. The content was developed by each of
the 30 stakeholders that are included in the path, creating a shared vision on
beekeeping for self-sufficiency.

The municipality has taken over the role of developer and facilitator. Special
attention is also paid to the elderly, who are involved in various educational
activities, field trips and lectures where experts teach about the importance of
honey and bee products for their health. Four members of the Bee Path have
completed a course in apitherapy and are passing their knowledge to the
younger generation. Moreover, the Bee Path is an extremely interesting tourist
product, which promotes local tourism and the consumption of the locally
produced honey.




                                           27
3.2.4. Climate — Riga: Biomass heat for greenhouse production

Getliņi EKO is an environmentally friendly, high-technology ecological waste
management company, majority-owned by the Municipality of Riga, that
operates the Getliņi waste landfill site. It is responsible for the collection and
ecological management of waste within the Riga waste-management area.
About 50 % of all waste produced in Latvia, or 300 000 tonnes of waste
annually, is transported to Getliņi.

Food waste forms 41 50 % of waste biomass. The efficient use of this waste has
been an issue for the municipality for many years, because food waste accounts
for a huge amount of the waste that is deposited. For reasons involving
environmental safety and the well-being of surrounding areas, and because of
limited opportunities to grow territorially, this growth had to be limited. Food
waste, when disposed of, creates landfill gas that should be properly gathered
and used, otherwise it has a very negative impact on the environment and the
soil. The practice plan for the landfill is based on two main pillars: operational
practice and social education.

Food waste is deposited in environmentally safe biodegradable cells. The landfill
gas that forms in the cells is channelled to the Getliņi power unit and
transformed into energy. The impact of waste on the environment is reduced to
a minimum. The gas is transformed into energy. Getliņi ecological landfill is one
of the largest producers of green energy in Latvia (in 2015, 33 718 200 kWh).
The by-product of energy production is heat (in 2015, 21 336 800 kWh). The
heat is used by the greenhouses that are located in the territory of the landfill
and operated by Getliņi EKO.

The greenhouse team grows tomatoes during the local vegetable off-season,
and supplies Riga’s citizens via the largest supermarket chains. The possibility
of having vegetables is an important aspect, since Latvia as a Nordic country
experiences insufficient vegetable supplies during winter and spring. Only
organic solutions and natural organisms are used to grow tomatoes, meaning
that they are healthy and valuable products. Some 390 tonnes are produced
during the off-season.

The quality and the nutrition value of the products are higher than those of
imported tomatoes. This ecological management practice has created a chain of
benefits: food waste turned into green energy and nutritious food, with a huge
positive impact on the environment. Due to Riga’s practices our atmosphere is
protected from 2 000 m3 of environmentally harmful gases per hour. Intensive
educational work is carried out to educate society about the life cycle of
household waste, recycling and food-waste reduction.

The company organises free field trips to the landfill, along with visiting
seminars. The field trips are available for pre-schools, schools, universities,
companies, groups of environmental activists, etc.




                                           28
3.2.5. Circularity — Bruges: Food-waste reduction in healthcare

In 2015, the City of Bruges facilitated a bottom-up process to build a
sustainable food policy focused on food-waste reduction in public organisations.
Recent research shows that food waste is a major problem in the healthcare
sector, and could reach up to 40 % of total waste. The health sector faces
unique challenges: healthcare structures create personalised dietary options
based on the health status of patients, and they frequently serve non-voluntary
consumers and unpredictable numbers of clients. On top of that, it is often not
straightforward to bring together the different stakeholders along the food chain
of healthcare institutions. This makes food-waste reduction a complicated
effort. To tackle this issue, the Municipality of Bruges coordinated an
immersive, participatory process of measurement, ideation, evaluation and
refinement of food-waste-reduction approaches in the healthcare sector.

The overall objective was to find solutions to reduce food waste in healthcare
institutions through a participatory approach. Bruges has 19 healthcare
institutions, four of which are actively involved in the project that started in
2017 (three centres with a total of 1 479 patients and a catering operator linked
to six care institutions).

The first step in the process was to measure and analyse current food waste
and its economic impact in the four selected healthcare institutions. The next
step was to support them in reducing food waste by coaching employees,
developing successful methodologies to reduce food waste in healthcare
institutions. The personnel of the healthcare structures were trained in
measuring food waste and were actively involved in an innovative process to
find specific solutions.

Furthermore, surveys were conducted among personnel, patients and visitors to
gain information on the quality, quantity, choice and timing of meals and the
way they were being served. The solutions were transferred to other healthcare
institutions in Bruges and the region of Flanders through a manual. Besides
healthcare institutions, FoodWIN (the European Food Waste Innovation
Network, which supports European cities in reducing food waste) and the Food
Lab of Bruges were involved in the innovation process.

Results and lessons learned. Food waste can be reduced by 27 652 kg per year,
which results in a saving of 88 487 kg CO2 equivalent per year. Besides
prevention, the project also focuses on the valorisation of food waste through
donations to local food banks. Beyond quantifiable results, the main innovation
introduced by this practice lies in its participatory approach, which was
fundamental in addressing the complexity of tackling food waste in the
healthcare sector. Nurses, nutritionists and kitchen staff are in key positions to
create tailored solutions.




                                           29
3.2.6. Circularity — Ghent: Foodsavers

At the city level there are significant volumes of leftover food available through
classic wholesale distribution and retail systems. At the same time, cities are
trying to tackle food poverty and malnourishment within their urban context. In
Ghent the municipality noticed that there was a larger amount of leftover food
available than was being recovered and redistributed by social organisations.
The City of Ghent and the social welfare department built scenarios with the
stakeholders involved and decided to launch a logistics platform to better match
the available amount of and the demand for leftover food. This process took
about 2 years of discussions and research.

In March 2017 the Foodsavers platform was launched. It brings together
leftover food from the wholesale market and local retailers and redistributes it
to social organisations in Ghent. The organisations are a mix of food banks,
social restaurants and social supermarkets. The goal is threefold, as explained
below.

   Climate target. By preventing food from being wasted, CO2 emissions are
    decreased. According to the FAO, decreasing food waste in Ghent by
    100 tonnes would be equivalent to preventing 254 tonnes of CO2 emissions.
    The goal was to prevent at least 100 tonnes of food from being wasted in
    2017.
   Social employment. The Foodsavers platform is being operated by people
    who have been in long-term unemployment. The project trains them in
    logistical skills and prepares them for the regular labour market. The goal
    was to employ 10 to 12 long-term unemployed people for whom access to
    the labour market was difficult.
   Fighting poverty. The leftover food is distributed to people living in poverty.
    It focuses on fresh, healthy food and should thus increase access to healthy
    food for people in that group. Nevertheless, the project is not considered to
    be a structural way of fighting poverty because it does not tackle the causes
    of food poverty. The whole topic of food poverty and determining the causes
    of a lack of access to healthy, sustainable food is being looked at in another
    project.

After 10 months the results are overwhelming. Some 300 tonnes of food have
been recovered and redistributed. That equals savings of about 762 tonnes of
CO2 emissions. Most of the leftovers are fruit and vegetables. A total of 172 000
portions have been redistributed to about 19 000 people, both as food packs for
families in need and as individual meals in social restaurants. Nineteen formerly
unemployed people have already been given work though Foodsavers.

Leftovers are being distributed through 58 social organisations, and 24
retailers, one wholesale market, two retail distribution centres, one organic
farm and one company have provided leftovers. The project has been very
successful, and has received a lot of study visits from other cities, both locally
and internationally. It has already received three awards.




                                           30
3.2.7. Innovation — Ede: Political commitment for food governance

The City of Ede adopted its first integrated food strategy in 2015. A careful
process followed in which many different stakeholders from society were
consulted to create a bottom-up food policy. Whereas many municipalities
develop their strategy as a voluntary tool that provides guidance, Ede’s food
strategy was officially adopted by the city council, which gives it very significant
status. The city council showed that the strategy would not remain only on
paper by allocating a large budget upon adoption. Through this integrated food
strategy, Ede works to ensure that healthy and sustainable food is available to
all of its citizens by focusing on improving and strengthening both the economic
and the social conditions in Ede.

Ede is the first municipality in the Netherlands to truly achieve a food
governance shift towards healthy and sustainable food for all its citizens.
Through its integrated food strategy, food issues are addressed in a systemic
and coherent way. Ede goes even further by having a food programme to
operationalise this strategy, a budget to implement it, a municipal food team of
five full-time staff and the first municipal food councillor in the Netherlands with
food as the primary subject in his portfolio. This political and administrative
commitment is in fact rooted in the municipal organisation, which works closely
together with a wide range of societal actors.

The Municipality of Ede is also in close contact with other cities (through the
project ‘City deal: Food on the urban agenda’), the province of Gelderland
(regional level) and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Internal Affairs
(national level). Together with these partners, the city is integrating its own
role as a local government within the food system, in coordination with the
province and the national government.

Results and lessons learned. By using an integrated food strategy Ede connects
several elements of the food system: food education, public health, food waste,
short food chains, sustainable and innovative food production and integrated
governance. Ede applies a multilevel approach, focused on territorial and social
inclusion. The best example of this is the ‘FoodFloor’, a concept developed by
several citizens’ groups. Citizens can pitch an idea for healthy/sustainable food
in Ede and apply for a small subsidy to take their project to the next level.

The subsidies are provided by the municipality. FoodFloor is hence a nice
example of an innovative collaboration between societal groups and the
municipality for a modern way of assisting food initiatives. Getting food issues
on the political agenda is a complex journey, for which a specific food team can
be an important catalyst.




                                            31
3.2.8. Innovation — Bordeaux: Metropolitan food council

In 2011, the Quévremont report, commissioned by the Urban Community of
Bordeaux, revealed the causes of the disappearance of the urban greenbelt of
the agglomeration and stressed the limit of its food self-sufficiency: only 1 day.
The territorial diagnosis of Bordeaux Métropole and the mapping of actors, both
carried out in 2014 by the International Urban Food Network, made it possible
to put a spotlight on these territorial problems (urban sprawl, increasing
distance between producers and consumers, public health issues), while at the
same time identifying the many initiatives taking place relating to food.

In this context, a need was felt to invent a new mechanism for the governance
of territorial initiatives that could articulate the actions of public and private
actors and civil society at different scales. Moreover, the theme of sustainable
food has become subject to national and territorial questions with the
promotion of Territorial Food Projects, a mechanism promoted by the Ministry
of Food and Agriculture.

Bordeaux Métropole is also a pilot territory of the GouTer (Gouvernance
territoriale des systèmes alimentaires) project (by the International Urban Food
Network, the Institute for Research and Debate on Governance and the RUAF
Foundation). The project aims to strengthen territorial authorities’ capacities in
local governance of food systems. Against this background, and strengthened
by the experience that it has acquired over the last several years, Bordeaux
Métropole decided to bring the subject of food governance to its 28
municipalities, in parallel and in strict correlation with the topic of agriculture,
while investing in partnerships with neighbouring territories. The metropolis
represents the right level for the steering of this food-governance body because
of its consumption pool, its broadened powers and its links with rural territories.

On 19 May 2017, the Bordeaux Metropolitan Council approved the creation of
the Consultative Council for Sustainable Food Governance in Bordeaux
Métropole (CCGAD), enabling the metropolis to pool its competences in relation
to sustainable food in a single body. Thus, the objective of the council is to offer
communities and actors in the territories the means to create original
initiatives, new tools and innovative methodologies for the relocation of the
food system. Its main aim is to ensure that the issue of sustainable food is
highlighted in the metropolitan strategy, following a participatory approach.

The Council will also address the issues of sustainable food at the
suprametropolitan level, while assessing the impact of actions taken to work
towards an ecological transition. The Council aims to include the territory’s
various ‘actors’, divided into five colleges. These actors will be represented in
the four thematic workshops, which will integrate all six thematic areas of the
MUFPP.




                                            32
3.3. Milan as a living laboratory: learning from global knowledge to
     shape Milan’s food policy as a beta tester and trendsetter
The City of Milan, during Expo Milan 2015 ‘Feeding the Planet, Energy for
Life’, adopted one of the most innovative urban food policies in Europe. In 2014
Milan started an action-research process that produced an analysis of its food
system, articulated through 10 main issues. After that, the city launched a
public consultation engaging its different departments, universities, civil-society
organisations, start-ups and the private sector.
The Milan food policy was the first innovative step the municipality took to
move forward in making its food system more sustainable, resilient and equal.
The policy, first of its kind in Italy, is the result of a growing awareness among
different actors on pressing environmental issues and on the need for the
responsible management of food assets. The Milan food policy was created
thanks to the partnership between the municipality and the Cariplo Foundation.
In July 2014, the partners signed a memorandum of understanding to promote
and implement the initiative.
The Cariplo Foundation further committed itself to allocating funds for the
technical support of the food policy, provided by an independent research
centre. In 2014, a preliminary local food-system study was defined, and the
active involvement of citizens and all those operating in the city as part of the
food system was sought in order to capitalise on the different resources (ideas,
skills, investment, planning, etc.) able to trigger a multiplier effect. The food
policy became a reference initiative ready to pay attention to the city’s needs.




Figure   5.   Diagram   showing   the   Milan   food   system’s   main   elements   (Andrea   Magarini,   2015).




                                                           33
The process ended in 2015 with a vote in the city council on five priorities
encompassing different themes with an integrated approach, 16 guidelines and
48 actions for the Milan food policy. These five priorities were:

1.   ensuring healthy food and water for all citizens;
2.   promoting the sustainability of the food system;
3.   promoting food education;
4.   fighting against food waste;
5.   supporting scientific research in the agri-food sector.

From 2016 the City of Milan, within the framework of its food policy,
implemented several actions relating to the target areas of multilevel
governance; local public procurement and innovative peri-urban agriculture;
food losses and waste management; and healthy diets. In 2017 a Vice-Mayor
for Milan Food Policy was designated by the mayor, with coordination role and
with the technical support of the newly established Food Policy Office.

Milan is committed to including choices that directly or indirectly affect food and
water in the framework of its institutional prerogatives and in the activities of
its subsidiary companies, in order to improve people’s quality of life and the
quality of its territory, and also to play an innovation role at the national and
international levels.

The food policy is gradually reaching different areas around the city; the map
below shows how the initiative has spread. The markers refer to short-supply-
chain project partners, local food waste hubs, associations and businesses that
are active against food waste, schools with food policy projects, significant
institutions and food policy hubs. As an integrated but also innovative action,
being able to reach the majority of the city is a primary goal of the food policy
and proves its ability to involve a wide range of stakeholders.




Figure 6. Geolocalisation of the Milan food policy actions (City of Milan, 2019).




                                                           34
3.3.1. The responsible research and innovation approach at the base of the
preliminary study for the Milan food policy

RRI is a cross-cutting issue in Horizon 2020, the EU’s 2014-2020 programme
for research and innovation. RRI means engaging society in science and
innovation very early in the process of R & I in order to align its outcomes with
the values of society. It connects different aspects of the relationship between
R & I and society: public engagement, open access, gender equality, science
education, ethics and governance. RRI entails engaging all actors (researchers,
policymakers, educators, business and industry innovators, civil-society
organisations) through inclusive, participatory methodologies in all stages of the
R & I process and at all levels of R & I governance (from agenda setting to
design, implementation and evaluation). This in turn will help R & I tackle
societal challenges and align with the values, needs and expectations of a wider
public. Not only is this ethically and societally worthwhile, but it also produces
better science, making research agendas more diverse and taking better
account of real-world complexities.

During the starting phase of the food policy, what immediately became clear
was the complexity of food as an issue and its natural engagement with
multiple stakeholders and different views, values, needs, desires and opinions.

To tackle this complexity, the collaboration between the Cariplo Foundation and
the City of Milan brought looked at the RRI methodological approach as a tool
to explore the fluid panorama of Milan’s food system. The choice to implement
the RRI approach is rooted in the values of responsibility, openness and
inclusion that inspire the method, as well as its robustness.

Clearly, any method requires adaptation in order to be applied efficiently in a
specific context, along with a certain level of flexibility. The journey of the Milan
food policy began in 2014, with the memorandum of understanding signed
between the Cariplo Foundation and the City of Milan to promote and
implement a comprehensive strategy on food for the City of Milan. From the
very beginning, the aim was to develop a policy for and of citizens as a legacy
of Expo 2015. This necessitated a dialogue bringing together citizens,
entrepreneurs, researchers and policymakers, which occurred in May 2015 at
an open public debate hosted by the City of Milan at City Hall. A long period of
preparatory work, supported by the Cariplo Foundation, created a
comprehensive map of the current state of affairs in relation to the local food
system, in terms of research, private actors and projects. The preparatory work
encouraged the debate on food-system issues and allowed a picture of the
Milan context to be put together.

The next step in the process was the approval of Milan food-policy guidelines in
October 2015 that reflected the indications and insights that had emerged from
the preparatory work and the public debate. The high level of engagement of
the local municipality in this initiative was evident from the very beginning, and
after the approval of the food-policy guidelines it made the decision to establish
a Milan Food Policy Office within the municipality. This choice had significant
practical consequences. More specifically, it led to the development, support
and launch of a number of initiatives, projects and events that have permeated
the local food system since 2017. The governance of the food policy required


                                            35
the direct engagement of important figures such as Milan’s vice-mayor, the
delegate for the municipality and the head of the Cariplo Foundation’s Science
and Research Area. Together they make up the Milan Food Policy Advisory
Board, shaping the office, identifying the timeline and priorities and
guaranteeing that the activities are closely aligned with the Milan food-policy
guidelines.

The Milan food policy is still thriving. This experience allowed the RRI
approach — a method the Cariplo Foundation participated in building on
through its engagement in the ‘RRI tools’ project (seventh framework
programme grant No 612393) — to be put into practice. As an approach, RRI
works well in tackling complex issues such as food, food systems and other
food-related issues (e.g. social inclusion, mitigation of food poverty, climate
change, etc.). Nonetheless, as with everything, it comes with a cost that in this
case is in terms of both time and money. It should be noted that the
participation of a body such as the Cariplo Foundation (which is synonymous
with reliability) and the strong engagement of policymakers were crucial
ingredients for the success of the Milan food policy. In this context, all the
relevant stakeholders participating Milan’s food system were willing to
participate in bringing to the debate different visions, values and opinions. This
hybridisation of perspectives guaranteed the development of innovative ideas
and initiatives that together represent the uniqueness of the Milan food policy.

3.3.2. The sustainable development goals in the city’s agenda

The holistic approach of urban food policies makes them compliant with the
SDGs of Agenda 2030. Milan, thanks to the support of an independent research
centre, explored the synergy between its food-policy priorities, the MUFPP
monitoring framework and the SDGs’ targets. The result was an instrument that
could provide permanent monitoring of the policy advancements with both
qualitative and quantitative indicators. The process will lead to the development
of a tool for the accountability of Milan towards its citizens in sharing priorities
and assessing the results in comparison with other global cities. It could also
become a participation tool for citizens within an international framework.

3.3.3. Stakeholder engagement as a paradigm to work with urban actors

The Milan food policy was launched after a large-scale consultation among local
actors, involving citizens, universities, NGOs and the private sector. During the
implementation of the policy a large number of stakeholders were involved at
different levels. NGOs and citizens are engaged through thematic workshops
that are organised on a yearly basis. Strong partnerships with academia and
the private sector contribute to the implementation of the policy at the local
level.

To maintain a constant level of engagement since 2015 the municipality has
established institutional relations, through letters of intent and memoranda of
understanding, with the main public players of the Milan system. These actors
have become the main stakeholders of the municipality in implementing the
food policy.




                                            36
Year          Actor                           Topic

2015          Cariplo Foundation              Joint deal to develop the food policy

2016          Assolombarda                    Defining a model against food waste
              (private-sector union)          in the different city neighbourhoods’
                                              local food waste hubs
              Politecnico di Milano (*)
              (University School of
              Management)

2017          Regional Health Agency (*)      Developing joint actions on healthy
                                              diets

2018          Milan Agricultural Park (*)     Promoting local agriculture

              Slow Food Italy

2019          Ellen MacArthur Foundation      Support for the circular economy

2019          Metropolitan Authority*         Promoting the circular economy and
                                              the food policy in local schools
              ATO (*) (metropolitan
              agency of municipalities for
              water)

              Regional School Office (*)

(*) Public bodies

In parallel with these actors, the municipality can count on the constant
engagement of its own municipal agencies, with direct effects on the food
system. Among these we note:

   Milano Ristorazione — Municipal Agency for School Canteens,
   AMSA — Municipal Agency for Waste Management,
   AMAT — Municipal Agency for Environmental Accountabilty,
   MM — Municipal Agency for Water Management,
   Sogemi — Municipal Agency for General Food Market.

3.3.4. Nutrition

‘Morning break with fruit’ is an initiative developed by Milano Ristorazione
within the scope of the Milan food policy. This initiative aims to improve school
children’s diets by supporting the consumption of fruit as a snack in the
morning. ‘Morning break with fruit’ was developed to fight obesity among
children, a growing issue over the last 20 years, promoting healthy habits and
lifestyles. At the same time, the consumption of fruit in the morning allows food
waste to be reduced at lunchtime, further contributing to the sustainability of
the whole food system. Finally, the distribution of fruit as a snack allows
financial pressure to be reduced on vulnerable families, who might struggle to
provide healthy food to their children.


                                             37
A first pilot scheme was launched in June 2016, involving approximately 30
primary schools and 4 000 children. The project has now become a standard
practice in approximately 50 primary schools within the city, specifically
targeting vulnerable neighbourhoods. The added value of the project lies in its
integration within the school system, which allows a constantly growing number
of children to be reached. Two years after the launch of ‘Morning break with
fruit’ it was found that eating fruit instead of other food in mid morning
increases the enjoyment of lunch by 11 %, and also leads to a drop in the
amount of food waste, quantified in a decrease of 17 %.

Milano Ristorazione has also started a process of sensitisation of children and
parents by introducing changes to the school menu. The municipal agency has
completely eliminated added salt from kindergarten menus and food
preparation. This project has been under way since 2017, and the aim is to
follow children over the years and over their school experience so that as they
grow and go to primary school, the programme will follow them. Similarly, but
for different reasons, Milano Ristorazione significantly cut the presence of red
meat in primary school menus. The menu has been suitably adapted by
replacing red meat with other protein sources. In this case the aim is to educate
children on food variety and reduce CO2 emissions due to animal farming.

The City of Milan is also active in defining a map of the school gardens that
are active in Milan. The idea is to provide every school with a handbook that
explains the best way to start a school garden, choose the correct cultivars and
grow them to be consumed by children and families. The municipality also aims
to increase the number of school gardens to enhance Milan’s production of
healthy food.

3.3.5. Climate

The food policy has connected public procurement for school canteens in Milan
with the rice supply chain through Milan’s agricultural district (180 000 kg/year,
to the value of EUR 300 000/year). The know-how provided by this experience
now acts as the grounds for further scalability by making available 19
horticultural supply chains for school canteens’ public procurement. With
co-financing from the EU’s common agricultural policy managed by the regional
authority, an integrated area plan was created with 31 partners in Milan
reorienting investments in agricultural farms to the value of EUR 4 million.
Under this plan the funds are invested in the conversion of cultures concerning
local organic horticultural supply chains.

The municipality, together with the Municipal Agency for Waste Management
and the energy provider, has launched a project called #AmbienteaScuola
(environment at school). The initiative began in 2018, and aims to introduce
separate waste collection in all of the city’s schools, along with environmental
education, contributing to the implementation of the SDGs. The project is
developing a pilot scheme in 2019 to create plastic-free schools. Two high
schools planned to become the first to completely eliminate bottled water from
their buildings, distributing steel bottles and installing free water distributors.

The City of Milan is lead of the development education and awareness raising
project ‘Food wave — empowering urban youth for climate action’. The


                                           38
project’s overall objective is that EU citizens will increase their knowledge of,
awareness of and engagement on sustainable patterns of food consumption and
production for climate-change mitigation and adaptation. In order to contribute
to this wider goal, the project will attempt to ensure that young people in 16 EU
Member States are committed to changing their food consumption behaviour
and actively promote the shift towards ecological and inclusive urban food
systems, contributing to the EU’s efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate
change. In fact, the main expected results of the projects are that it will raise
awareness of the importance of climate-friendly food consumption (i.e.
behaviours, policies and food-system models) and have an impact on policies
and food-system models through the development of content and the
dissemination of media materials to sensitise young people to climate-change
issues.

3.3.6. Circularity

The city council approved a reduction in the waste tax in 2018. This reduced
the tax on waste by a maximum of 20 % in favour of food businesses that
donate their food losses to charities. The action is coordinated by different
departments of the municipality (fiscal, environmental, food policy) as part of a
multisectoral working group. The measure further supports the mapping,
strengthening and dissemination of food donation initiatives in the city, mainly
led by non-profit organisations. According to the preliminary review of
participation, it will lead to the recovery of over 600 tonnes of food. At the
same time, the action is a structural variation on the tax rules, enabling food-
policy initiatives to be consolidated and local players to become permanently
involved as it moves forward. For the first-year pilot scheme, the waste tax
allowed the engagement of about 50 supermarkets from six different
companies, five big retailers from the general markets, six small retailers and
106 school canteens.

In order to support food recovery by small, local players, the municipality has
developed an agreement with a university lab at the Politecnico di Milano (to
design a model and data analysis for food losses and waste management), the
private-sector union Assolombarda (representing supermarkets and companies
with canteens) and the philanthropic Cariplo Foundation (which covered the
infrastructure costs) to develop a pilot project to redistribute food losses in two
local neighbourhoods. One of the local food waste hubs is hosted in a space
owned by the municipality and managed by a food bank. During the course of
the pilot year of implementation (2019), the incoming and outgoing flows of
donations to and from the hub will be monitored and the knowledge will be
passed to 35 local organisations mapped by the food policy and working on food
donations. According to a preliminary analysis, each hub will gather and
redistribute approximately 60 tonnes of food per year.

Thanks to a systemic approach, these hubs generate positive economic, social
and environmental impacts.

   The hubs involved 15 supermarkets, four private canteens and 18 local
    social associations in the initiative.
   In 2018, the hubs saved and donated 60 tonnes of food losses, equivalent
    to 220 000 meals.


                                           39
   The commercial value of the food donations is estimated at about
    EUR 380 000.
   About EUR 6 000 worth of waste-treatment management costs were saved.
   Those involved could benefit from the deduction of VAT and income tax, in
    addition to the reduction in the waste tax for companies that donate food.
   The hub saved 96 million litres of water, the quantity needed to produce the
    food saved.
   The hub saved food that would have required an area equivalent to
    81 hectares for production.
   The equivalent of 237 tonnes of CO2 were saved thanks to the food
    recovery.

These data are generated on the basis of a set of proxy coefficients defined in
2015 in the local regional context by an assessment and a life-cycle assessment
organised by the regional authority.

3.3.7. Innovation

The community orchard in the neighbourhood of Gallaratese aims to
promote healthy food and health through the creation of a large-scale orchard
integrated into the neighbourhood. Through the involvement of the inhabitants
of the Gallaratese and QT8 districts, areas will be redeveloped that are not used
by citizens because they are enclosed, degraded or to be reclaimed, and they
will be used for the production of fruit and vegetables, along with integrated
services. Specifically, the Gallaratese orchard will lead to increased social
cohesion by directly involving the residents; will increase the attractiveness of
the neighbourhoods by building an identity associated with healthy food; and
will increase the quality of the local ecosystem through urban agriculture, green
roofs and the regeneration of the soil through bioremediation.

The Food Policy Hot Pot is an instrument launched by Cariplo Factory to bring
together businesses’ innovation needs under the Milan food-policy framework
and to connect them with start-up solutions. The Food Policy Hot Pot aims to
empower local actors in a broad innovation ecosystem, leading to new business
models and added-value products, goods and services, meeting the needs,
values and expectations of actors in a responsible and ethical way. More
specifically, business needs, either expressed or unexpressed, provide a basis
from which can grow original proposals from various sections of society, such as
independent citizens, schools, small businesses, NGOs and start-ups.

The participation of the local municipality in the Food Policy Hot Pot represents
a guarantee to citizens that this platform will respect and reflect the principles
of the food policy. The programme was able to involve five major food
companies that are present in Milan (three large retailers, one municipal agency
and the general market) and to bring together their innovation needs in the first
part of 2019. The second phase of the initiative will be opened up to start-ups
to be able to explore all kinds of solutions and business models.




                                           40
Getting in touch with the EU
IN PERSON
All over the European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct information centres.
You can find the address of the centre nearest you at:
https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_en

ON THE PHONE OR BY EMAIL
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union.
You can contact this service:
– by freephone: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (certain operators may charge for these calls),
– at the following standard number: +32 22999696 or
– by email via: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_en


Finding information about the EU
ONLINE
Information about the European Union in all the official languages of the EU is available on
the Europa website at: https://europa.eu/european-union/index_en

EU PUBLICATIONS
You can download or order free and priced EU publications at:
https://publications.europa.eu/en/publications. Multiple copies of free publications may be
obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your local information centre
(see https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_en)

EU LAW AND RELATED DOCUMENTS
For access to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1952 in all the official
language versions, go to EUR-Lex at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu

OPEN DATA FROM THE EU
The EU Open Data Portal (http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en) provides access to
datasets from the EU. Data can be downloaded and reused for free, for both commercial and
non-commercial purposes.
European cities leading in urban food systems transformation is a report
of significant EU experiences of urban food policies gathered by the City of
Milan, which started working on the topic in 2015 and occupies a strong
role in the leadership of the topic. The main aim of the document is to
facilitate debate, discussions, diffusion, mutual learning and the exchange
of best practices among the stakeholders active on these issues.

The report explores two of the main frameworks on food policies:
the Milan Urban Food Policy Pact and Food 2030, with a focus on the
European regionalisation process carried out by Eurocities. The European
Commission is greatly interested in the potentiality of urban contexts
to address food-related issues, and the report therefore provides a
general overview of 101 European cities’ actions and eight in-depth best
practices, along with a thorough analysis of Milan’s experience.




Studies and reports
