Skip to content 

English 

Suomi 

Finnish Organic Food Association 

News 

Organics in Finland 

What we do 

Contact information 

Edellinen 
The year 2023 was challenging for organic products – growth momentum can be sought from professional kitchens 

Seuraava 
A steady year for organic – reasons to celebrate include winning the EU organic awards and the increased use of organic products in public kitchens 

General 

The organic market in Finland is searching for direction – a new upswing has not yet begun 

12.02.2025 klo 10:47 
Jaa: 

Organic sales declined last year, continuing the trend of the previous two years, but there are also some growing organic product categories. Sales of organic baby food reached a new record, and already a quarter of the total baby food sales value comes from organic products. 

Organic products were sold in grocery stores for €335 million in 2024, according to an estimate by the Finnish Organic Food Association Pro Luomu ry. Sales declined by five percent compared to the previous year. The share of organic products in Finland’s total grocery sales was approximately 1.8 percent. 

The total value of organic sales was particularly affected by the decline in sales of major organic product categories, such as milk and other dairy products, as well as fruits and vegetables. Sales of organic eggs, as well as organic coffee, tea, and cocoa, remained at the previous year’s level. However, there were also growth areas: sales increased for organic baby food, organic flakes and flours, and dried organic fruits and nuts. 

Organic baby food has been a positive exception to the overall trend in product categories during the past three challenging years for organic products. In 2024, the market share of organic baby food reached a record 25 percent of total sales value. 

“In baby food, the positive associations linked to organic products certainly play a role – parents want the purest and best nutrition for their young children and babies. The development of the product selection and the wide availability of organic options in this category also have a significant impact,” says  Juha Nieminen , sales manager at S Group. 

According to a recent consumer study, interest in organic products among consumers has remained steady and even shows a slight increase compared to last year’s survey (Kantar Agri 2024). However, the impact of Finnish consumers’ cost-saving measures is still visible in organic sales. Consumer confidence in their own finances, as well as expectations for both their personal and Finland’s economic situation a year from now, have remained low (Statistics Finland 2025). 

“I believe that organic products will be able to grow in the future as the overall economic situation improves. The current situation is challenging, and consumers are being very careful about what they buy,” says  Carita Rissanen , purchasing and sales director at K Group. 

The estimate of organic sales is based on data collected by Pro Luomu from retail groups. 

Additional information: 

Aura Lamminparras, Executive Director, Finnish Organic Food Association Pro Luomu ry, tel. 040 556 8097, aura.lamminparras@proluomu.fi 

Aiheeseen liittyvää 

Sales of organic food in Finland returned to growth in 2025 

A steady year for organic – reasons to celebrate include winning the EU organic awards and the increased use of organic products in public kitchens 

The year 2023 was challenging for organic products – growth momentum can be sought from professional kitchens 

Information 
The Finnish Organic Food Association Pro Luomu promotes the production and consumption of organic food in Finland. 

Contact 
Pro Luomu ry

Hämeentie 31 A

00500 Helsinki

info@proluomu.fi 

Rekisteriseloste ja yksityisyydensuoja 

© Pro Luomu ry 2018
