Area under organic farming | Iceland | Europe's environment 2025 (EEA) 

Skip to main content Skip to navigation Skip to footer 
An official website of the European Union | How do you know?
All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain.
See all EU institutions and bodies 

Environmental information systems
European Environment Agency website 
WISE marine - Marine information system for Europe 
WISE freshwater - Freshwater information system for Europe 
BISE - Biodiversity information system for Europe 
FISE - Forest information system for Europe 
European Climate and health observatory 
ClimateADAPT 
European Industrial Emissions Portal 
Climate and energy in the EU 
Copernicus Land Monitoring Service 
Copernicus InSitu 

EN
Български BG 
čeština CS 
Hrvatski HR 
dansk DA 
Nederlands NL 
ελληνικά EL 
English EN 
eesti ET 
Suomi FI 
Français FR 
Deutsch DE 
magyar HU 
Íslenska IS 
italiano IT 
Latviešu LV 
lietuvių LT 
Malti MT 
Norsk NO 
polski PL 
Português PT 
Română RO 
slovenčina SK 
Slovenščina SL 
Español ES 
Svenska SV 
Türkçe TR 

Report home 
Outreach corner 
Ask AI assistant 

Country profiles 

Iceland 

Area under organic farming

Area under organic farming
Chart (interactive) Published 29 Sept 2025 Modified 23 Sept 2025 

Share 

The indicator shows the share of the EU’s agricultural land used for organic farming and the distance to the target of a 25% share as set by the European Green Deal.

Not assessed 
Benchmark not applicable 

*Note: The EU target does not apply to Iceland. 

Assessment 
Data sources 
Metadata 

A few dedicated farmers have maintained their organic farming status for years. When conventional farmers convert to organic production it does not result in an increase in overall production, but the proportion of organic agricultural area should increase as the oldest farmers retire. However, converting from conventional to organic farming is not common, so the organic farming trend in Iceland has shown no growth. 
The main objective of Iceland’s recent action plan for promoting organic food production is for 10% of the total agricultural area to be certified organic or under conversion by 2040.
To achieve this goal, the aim is not only to provide support to farmers for converting to organic farming but also to support certified organic farmers for up to seven years after they convert as an adaptation measure . This includes support for abattoirs to convert and a project to solve the lack of fertilisers in a very sparsely populated country. 
The action plan aims to increase funding for research, innovation and development; build up knowledge and create an advisory service for farmers and producers; and follow trends and gather data on the changes, both in agriculture and in imports and market shares.

Organic crop area by agricultural production methods and crops , Eurostat

Topics Agriculture and food 
Land use 

Geographical coverage Iceland

Temporal coverage 2012-2020

Related content

References and footnotes

https://lifraentisland.is/ 

↵ 

About us FAQs Careers 

Contact us 

Sign up to our newsletter 

Explore our environmental information systems 

Privacy statement Accessibility Legal notice 

Sitemap System status Login 

top
