                 COUNTRY PROFILE
                                 PART 1

                               ICELAND

    Competent authority control systems

                            in the areas of

food and feed safety, animal health and animal
                                   welfare




     Avenue des Arts 19H, B-1000 Brussels, tel: +32 2 286 18 11, www.eftasurv.int
Page 2



Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 3


1      COMPETENT AUTHORITIES AND IMPLEMENTATION OF REQUIREMENTS ...... 4
1.1        Designation of competent authorities ....................................................................... 4
1.2        Resources for performance of controls .................................................................. 11
1.3        Organisation and implementation of official controls ............................................. 12
1.4        Enforcement measures .......................................................................................... 13
1.5        Verification and review of official controls .............................................................. 13
1.6        Multi-annual national control plan (MANCP) and annual reports .......................... 15


2      ORGANISATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES IN RELATION TO CONTROL SYSTEMS
       ..................................................................................................................................... 18
2.1        Control system for animal health ............................................................................ 18
2.2.       Control system for food of animal origin................................................................. 22
2.3.       Control system for imports of animals, germinal products and food of animal origin
              .......................................................................................................................... 24
2.4.       Control system for feeding stuffs and animal nutrition........................................... 28
2.5.       Control system for Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (TSE) ................. 30
2.6.       Control system for Animal By-Products (ABP)....................................................... 32
2.7.       Control system for veterinary medicinal products (VMP) and residues ................ 33
2.8.       Control system for foodstuffs and food hygiene..................................................... 37
2.9.       Control system for imports of food of non-animal origin ........................................ 40
2.10       Control system for plant protection products (PPP) and residues......................... 42
2.11. Control system for animal welfare .......................................................................... 45
2.12 Control system for organic production ....................................................................... 47


ANNEX I – ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS AND SPECIAL TERMS............................ 48




                                                                            Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 3

    INTRODUCTION
This country profile has been drawn up by Iceland in cooperation with the EFTA
Surveillance Authority (“the Authority”) to present in a summary form the latest
information available on the Icelandic control systems related to food and feed safety,
animal health and welfare. Plant health is not part of the country profile as it does not fall
under the Agreement of the European Economic Area (“the EEA Agreement”, “the
Agreement”).
The information in this country profile has been compiled from:
   Recent written submissions and background documentation from the Icelandic
    competent authorities detailing how control systems are organised.
   The results of the EFTA Surveillance Authority’s missions to Iceland in recent years
    and, in particular, a general review mission in Iceland which took place in January
    2023.


This country profile is presented in two m ain chapters :
Chapter 1 describes the overall organisation of the Icelandic authorities and the
respective responsibilities of the relevant ministries in relation to the different components
of the control system.
Chapter 2 gives a more detailed description of the different control systems that form the
complete range of official controls in Iceland and cover the whole chain of animal, feed
and food production.
This country profile is to be updated at least every three years pursuant to the EFTA
Surveillance Authority’s missions or additional relevant information being submitted by
the Icelandic competent authorities.
Acronyms are used extensively throughout this report for the sake of brevity. A list of
acronyms, abbreviations and special terms is given in Annex I.




                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 4

1   Competent Authorities and implementation of requirements
    1.1. Designation of competent authorities
The main Icelandic legislation in relation to designation of competent authorities for food,
feed, animal health and animal welfare are:
        Act No 93/1995 on Food;
        Act No 25/1993 on Animal Diseases and Preventive Measures;
        Act on Veterinarians and Animal Health, No 66/1998;
        Act on Control of Feed, Fertiliser and Seed, No 22/1994;
        Act on the Food and Veterinary Authority, No 30/2018;
        Act on Hygiene and Pollution Control, No 7/1998;
        Act on Animal Welfare, No 55/2013;
        Act on Livestock management, No 38/2013;
        Regulation No 102/2010, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 laying down
         the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European
         Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety;
        Regulation No 103/2010, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 on the
         hygiene of foodstuffs;
        Regulation No 104/2010, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 laying down
         specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin;
        Regulation No 234/2020, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 2017/625 on official
         controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food
         and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection
         products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC)
         No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014,
         (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the
         Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council
         Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC,
         and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the
         European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC,
         89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and
         Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation)
        Regulation No 107/2010, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 183/2005 laying down
         requirements for feed hygiene.
        Regulation No 674/2017 incorporating Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 laying down
         health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for
         human consumption and Regulation (EU) No 142/2011 implementing Regulation
         (EC) No 1069/2009 and Council Directive 97/78/EC
        Regulation no. 205/2023 incorporating Regulation (EU) no 2018/848 on organic
         production and labelling of organic products.
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (MoFAF)
The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (MoFAF) is the lead Ministry for policy
making, co-ordination and transposition of legislation concerning food and feed,
veterinary and phytosanitary matters. Within the Ministry, the Department of Food is
responsible for policy development, co-ordination and legislative matters (including the
transposition of EEA legislation) regarding food and feed, veterinary issues, organic


                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 5

production, phytosanitary matters and drinking water. The Department of Agriculture is
responsible for issues related to animal welfare.
The Ministry is also administratively responsible for the Icelandic Food and Veterinary
Authority (MAST) and the Directorate of Fisheries (DoF).
Picture 1. MoFAF organisation chart:




Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority (MAST)
Since 1st of January 2008, MAST is the central competent authority for food and feed
safety, animal health and animal welfare and operates under the auspice of MoFAF. The
organisation and structure of MAST is based on provisions of Act (IS) No 30/2018. MAST
operates four district offices and a division of import and export and is responsible for
operation of several Border Control Posts (BCPs) for control of import of foods from third
countries (non-EEA States).
MAST's primary roles are:
        Food safety; control of primary production of animal origin, production of
         foodstuffs of animal origin and import and export control of all foodstuffs;
        Control of organic production
        Controls regarding animal health and animal welfare;
        Plant protection services;
        Feed (including fish meal), seed and fertiliser services;
        Meat classification services;
        Disease control and prevention (zoonoses and contingency plans);

                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 6

        Consumer affairs and education;
        Administration and control of aquaculture;
        Coordination of domestic food control by the independent Municipal
         Environmental and Public Health Offices (Local Competent Authorities (LCAs))

Picture 2. MAST Organisation chart:




Director Gerneral
Responsible for MAST´s operation and day to day management of the organization.
Chief Veterinary Officer
Responsible for the professional aspect of animal health, - welfare, zoonosis, medicinal
resistance and matters concerning Veterinarians and Animal Nurses.
Director´s Office
Responsible for news reports, editorship of MAST´s website, communication with the
media, national and international organizations, other stakeholders and is responsible for
matters concerning human resources and the quality manual of the organization.
Coordination
Responsible for issues related to food safety, health and welfare of animals and plants.
Responsible for education and instructions within and outside MAST and for control- and
sampling plans. Is further responsible for processing of laboratory results and the
outcome of controls. Is responsible for reactions to animal disease outbreaks and
laboratory results etc. Responsible for specific controls, issuance of health certificates for
consignments to countries outside the EEA, and follow up measures and administrative
fines related to specific controls (eg. fish farming, fertilizer, import and export (not
including export og horses) and feed processing plants).
Control
Responsible for the organization and execution of controls, issuance of permits, follow up
of short – comings, enforcement measures and administrative fines related to serious
short - comings (however, not in relation to inspections carried out by Coordination).
Further responsible for reactions related to new and / or serious contagious animal
diseases and
in accordance with contingency plans and other appropriate disease preventive
measures and sampling in accordance with contingency plans.
                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 7

Legal affairs
Responsible for the administration of legal affairs within MAST´s scope and instructions
regarding legal matters.      Also responsible for communication with national and
international organizations on legal matters.
IT (Information Technology) and Administration
Is responsible for the daily running of MAST, information technology and digitalization of
operations. Additionally, the unit is responsible for the budget and inner control of the
organization´s finances.
In addition to the aforementioned units, there are four district offices affiliated to Control
above. Department of aquaculture and the department of import and export are divisions
of Coordination.

Directorate of Fisheries (DoF)
The Directorate of Fisheries is an agency of the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries. The Directorate's task is to monitor fishing activities and to administer the
fisheries management system in Iceland. This involves issuing of fishing permits,
distribution of quotas and overseeing the daily operation of the individually transferable
quota system. The Directorate collects data on all landed catch from landing sites in real
time as well as information on processing and exports of fish products. The Directorate
monitors the operation of fishing vessels, the weighing of landed catch and processing of
fish both on site and through electronic surveillance such as through vessel monitoring
systems which the Agency runs in cooperation with the Coast Guard of Iceland. The
Directorate employs approximately 65 people. The Directorate works in close cooperation
with the Marine Research Institute of Iceland, the Coast Guard and the Food and
Veterinary Authority of Iceland, as well as other agencies serving the fisheries sector,
both in Iceland and internationally.
The DoF is responsible for fisheries management in the Icelandic exclusive economic
zone as well as Icelandic fisheries outside Icelandic jurisdiction. The Directorate also has
administrative responsibilities and monitors fishing of salmonids in lakes and rivers and
oversees whaling.
Ministry of the Environment, Energy and Climate (MoEEC)
Ministry for the Environment, Energy and Climate formulates and enforces government
policy for environmental affairs, nature conservation, wildlife management, pollution and
waste management, environmental monitoring and surveillance.
Environment Agency (UST)
The Environment Agency operates under the auspice of MoEEC and its organisation and
structure are based on provisions of Act (IS) No 90/2002. UST has the role of promoting
environmental protection and sustainable use of Iceland’s natural resources, as well as
public welfare, by ensuring a healthy environment, safe consumer goods and enhancing
hygiene and safety in public facilities. UST is the competent authority for the
implementation of the Water Framework Directive. UST has a wide-reaching
administrative role, for instance concerning pollution issues (water, waste, air, soil), health
and safety, nature and wild animal protection, wildlife conservation and management,
monitoring of environmental quality, hunting management, biological diversity, the
registration and marketing of pesticides and certification systems for professional users of
pesticides as well as genetically modified organisms. The agency provides information
and gives advice to the public, businesses and regulatory authorities. UST and MAST
coordinate the work of LCAs as relevant.
Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices (LCA)
Iceland is divided into 9 LCA districts, each comprising between one and fourteen
municipalities. Each LCA district staff operates under the jurisdiction of a local public

                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 8

health committee, comprising control district staff, five politically appointed members, one
appointed by the local Nature preserve committees and one member representing the
confederation of Icelandic Employers. Each LCA has control duties within its districts
related to food safety, environmental protection and general hygiene. The organisation
and structure of the LCAs is based on provisions of Act (IS) No 7/1998 on Hygiene and
Pollution control. The district chief epidemiologist attends the meetings of the local public
health committees as needed.
LCAs have a direct role regarding food safety and organic production, namely:
    Control of retail; and
    Control of primary production of non-animal origin
      Control of production of foodstuffs of non-animal origin and composed foodstuffs.
Ministry of Health (MoH))
The Ministry of Healthis responsible for administration and policy for health and health
insurance issues in Iceland, as prescribed by law, regulations and directives, including:
        Public health;
        Patient rights;
        Operation of hospitals, health centres and other providers of health services;
        Promotion of information technology in the health services;
        Pharmaceutical affairs (including veterinary medicines);
        Health Insurances.
The Directorate of Health (DoH)
The Directorate of Health operates under the auspice of the MoH. The Chief
Epidemiologist at the DoH is responsible for health security and general and public
measures on communicable diseases and other threats to health. The Chief
Epidemiologist is also the chairperson of the Joint Committee on Health Security and
Communicable Disease Control (JC), a supervisory body appointed under the MoH.
The Icelandic Medicines Agency (IMA)
The Icelandic Medicines Agency operates under the auspice of the MoH. IMA´s
responsibilities are for example assessing quality and safety of medicinal products,
inspections to confirm that relevant regulatory requirements are fulfilled and consumer
protection.
Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Innovation (MoHESI)
The Ministry of Education, Science and Culture includes the Institute for Experimental
Pathology of the University of Iceland which undertakes some analytical work in relation
to official controls.
Ministry of Finance (MoF)
The Ministry of Finance oversees State finances. The Ministry provides advice to the
government on its policy areas and provides services and information to the general
public. Its responsibilities include customs issues (see Icelandic Revenue and Customs
below) and international co-operation.
Icelandic Revenue and Customs
Icelandic Revenue and Customs is under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Finance. Its
main role is to control import, transit and export and collect duties, taxes and other state
revenues.
MAST cooperates with the Icelandic Revenue and Customs authority as regards export
and import control including controls at BCPs and follow up of Rapid Alert System for
Food and Feed (RASFF) notifications.

                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 9

     Table 1. The main relevant authorities with responsibility

    Central level                                           Website

    MoFAF      Ministry of Food, Agriculture and            www.stjornarradid.is/raduneyti/m
               Fisheries                                    atvaelaraduneytid/

    MoEEC      Ministry for the Environment, Energy and     www.umhverfisraduneyti.is
               Climate

    MoH        Ministry of Health                           www.velferdarraduneyti.is

    MAST       Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority      www.mast.is

    UST        The Environment Agency                       www.ust.is

    DoH        Directorate of Health                        www.landlaeknir.is

    IMA        Icelandic Medicines Agency                   www.lyfjastofnun.is

    DoF        Directorate of Fisheries                     www.fiskistofa.is

    Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices (LCAs)

    HKK        LCA for Gardabaer, Hafnarfjordur,            www.hef.is
               Kopavogur, Mosfellsbaer and
               Seltjarnarnesarea

    HER        LCA for the City of Reykjavik                https://reykjavik.is/thjonusta/heil
                                                            brigdiseftirlit-reykjavikur
    HVL        LCA for Vesturland area                      https://hev.is/

    HVF        LCA for Vestfjordur area                     http://hevf.is/

    HNV        LCA for Nordurland west area                 www.hnv.is/
    HNE        LCA for Nordurland east area                 www.hne.is

    HAUSTT     LCA for Austurland area                      www.haust.is/
    HSL        LCA for Sudurland area                       swww.hsl.is

    HSN        LCA for Sudurnes area                        www.hes.is

    IRC        Icelandic Revenue and Customs                www.tollur.is

Scientific support / Other institutions

Risk assessment committee for food, feed, fertilizer and seeds (Ministry of Industries
and Innovation)

On the basis of the Food Act, 93/1995 and the Act on feed, fertilizer and seeds the
MoFAF has established a committee to carry out independent risk assessments
regarding foods, feed, fertilizer and seeds on request of MAST or MoFAF.




                                                   Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 10

Veterinary Council
Under the Act on Veterinarians and Animal Health Service (IS) No 66/1998, the
Veterinary Council deals with national issues such as import of live farm animals and
reproductive materials. The Council can be requested by the Minister to discuss and
evaluate the import of other live animals or animal products as well as other issues
regarding animal health.
Joint Committee on Health Security and Communicable Disease Control (JC)
The JC is a supervisory body appointed by the MoH to ensure that relevant information is
obtained, assessment is made, and appropriate measures taken to control and eliminate
the spread of infectious diseases.
The Chief Epidemiologist of the DoH is chairperson of the JC. MAST has two
representatives, a specialist on food safety and another on animal diseases. An
environment specialist and a radiation specialist are also appointed to the Committee.
Matís ohf (Ministry of Industries and Innovation)
Matís ohf was established by Act (IS) No 68/2006 on the Icelandic Food Research Ltd.
According to the Act, the laboratory has certain food safety obligations. Matís is the
National Reference Laboratory (NRL) for many areas including Salmonella, pesticide
residues and heavy metals.
Keldur - The Institute for Experimental Pathology of the University of Iceland (Ministry of
Education)
The Institute for Experimental Pathology analyses official samples for food-borne
pathogens and animal diseases (duties laid down in Act (IS) No 67/1990). The laboratory
also has a department for fish diseases established by Act (IS) No 50/1986. According to
the Act, the laboratory and CA are obliged to co-operate on measures to control/prevent
fish diseases. Keldur is the NRL for Campylobacter, parasites (in particular Trichinella,
Echinococcus and Anisakis), transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), fish
diseases, bivalve mollusc diseases and crustacean diseases.
Department of Immunology, the National University Hospital (Ministry of Health)
The laboratory is used by MAST and LCAs for the identification/confirmation of zoonotic
agents such as Salmonella serotypes. Staff at this laboratory may also be consulted by
the CAs regarding disease control and prevention, in both animals and humans.
Official laboratories
The CA designates laboratories who have accredited testing methods to carry out
analysis of samples taken during official controls. Some samples are sent for analysis to
laboratories in other Member States of the EEA when no laboratory in Iceland can
perform the tests required.
A list of official laboratories can be found at this link.
National Reference Laboratories (NRL)
The Ministry of Industries and Innovation has the responsibility to designate NRLs in
Iceland. An overview of Nordic NRL’s can be found on this link that also includes the
NRL’s that have been designated by MII in Iceland according to Article 100 in Regulation
(EC) No 2017/625 (national regulation IS 234/2020):
National accreditation bodies
Iceland's accreditation body ISAC (Icelandic Board for Technical Accreditation) the single
national accreditation body (NAB) of Iceland. ISAC is an independent division within the
Icelandic Intellectual Property Office (ISIPO) (in Icelandic: Hugverkastofan) which is a
governmental entity. ISAC assesses the competence of laboratories and certification
bodies according to Act (IS) No 24/2006 on accreditation. The assessment is carried out
by SWEDAC (Swedish Accreditation Body) on behalf of ISAC according to an agreement
                                                     Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 11

between the two accreditation bodies. ISAC and SWEDAC are members of the European
co-operation for Accreditation (EA). SWEDAC is also a signatory to the EA Multilateral
Agreement for Laboratories (EA MLA) and a member of the International Co-operation for
Laboratory Accreditation (ILAC).
Delegation of specific tasks related to official controls
There is a delegation of official controls within the meaning of Chapter III of Regulation
(EC) No 2017/625, in the field of organic production. MAST has contracted
Vottunarstofan Tún (TUN) for all control and certification of certified organic production in
Iceland according to Article 40 in Regulation (EU) No. 2018/848.

    1.2. Resources for performance of controls
Legal basis for controls
According to Article 30 of the Food Act (IS) No 93/1995, the CAs and their staff have full
access to the premises and documentation of FBOs. The Foodstuffs Act also requires the
FBOs to undergo inspections and assist the CAs in the process (Article 24 (1)).

Resources for performance of controls
MAST and the LCAs set the level of fees independently. Regulation (IS) No. 220/2018
deals with the funding of MAST through inspection fees which contribute to 30% of MAST
operational costs. The remaining 70% is financed from the state budget. The fees are
directly linked to inspection activity and the level of fees is based on actual cost for each
activity.
The LCAs are financed through inspection fees collected from inspected bodies and
direct funding from local municipalities. The level of fees is based on actual cost for each
activity. The fees are published in the Icelandic Official Journal.
Staff qualification and training
MAST has developed a training programme for employees and staff, which undergo initial
training, continuous and ad-hoc ongoing training. The training programme has been
published as LBE-198 in the Quality Manual. All new staff at MAST receive the same
initial training and those who carry out official controls receive additional specific training
adapted to their individual needs. Training for other staff will also be defined. The training
programme identifies responsibility of training, sets up basic programmes for different
roles and describes the registration of training and storage of training related documents.
All in-house training is registered in a system called Cloud Compliance Quality (CCQ) and
each staff member can furthermore upload their continuous education in the system.
LCA inspectors all have a university degree in subjects relevant to their tasks.
Furthermore, before being authorised by the Ministry of the Environment as public health
inspectors they have to participate in a training course arranged by MAST and undertake
practical training at a LCA district office.

Conflict of interest
Legal provisions are in place with regard to conflict of interest under various acts - Article
20 of the Government Employees Act (IS) No 70/1996 applies to MAST staff and Section
II of the Administrative Act (IS) No 37/1993 applies to MAST and LCAs staff. Official
veterinarians (OVs) are allowed, under some conditions, to carry out general veterinary
services but DVOs work exclusively on official controls and may not provide general
veterinary services.
MAST pays subsidies, provided by the annual budget, to private veterinary practitioners
(PVPs) to carry out veterinary services in ten remote areas through formal agreements.
These remote areas are defined in a regulation.



                                                   Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 12


   1.3. Organisation and implementation of official controls
Registration/approval of food business operators
According to Act (IS) No 93/1995 on Foodstuffs, all FBOs (for food of animal and non-
animal origin) need approval following a visit, except for sheep and horse farms and
vegetable growers, which need to be registered. Freezer and factory vessels are
approved, although for freezer, factory and other fishing vessels with primary production
only, a valid fishing permit is sufficient.
Standardized procedures for approval of establishments for food of animal origin and
feed production are in place.
Official controls are carried out by the relevant CA (MAST or LCAs).
MAST and LCA organise its controls on a risk basis. Different systems are applied for
different sectors although all systems are based on the same principles. Further
description of the organisation of controls within each sector are described in Chapter 2.
Risk-based prioritisation of controls, performance evaluation and reporting of control
activities
Food and feed
The control frequency of establishments producing food or feed is based on a risk
classification system. In addition to the risk-based prioritisation of controls the evaluation
of performance of FBOs during past controls affects their total control time or frequency of
inspections. Based on their performance evaluation FBOs are categorized into
performance categories. Each performance category has a performance index that
affects the total control time of the FBOs. Further descriptions of the risk classification
systems can be found on this link.
Performance evaluation of FBOs is based on inspection manuals that are part of the work
procedures for official controls of food and feed. Inspection manuals can be found on this
link.
Primary Production
A risk classification model has been implemented to evaluate the control frequency in
each establishment in primary production (other than fishing vessels, fish farming, shell
farming and vegetable growers). Performance evaluation will influence the risk-based
control frequency. Further description of the system can be found on this link. Inspection
manuals can be found on this link.
All the necessary information on primary producers have been transposed into IsLeyfur
and are used as the database for official controls on primary producers. Several
databases have been developed to keep records of live animals, their health status and
their treatment with veterinary medicines.
Transparency and confidentiality
The MAST website provides easily accessible news coverage of topics pertaining to food
safety and animal/plant health, publications and legislation. Part of the information is also
available on the English version of the website.
Concerning data protection, Article 24 (2) of the Foodstuffs Act (IS) No 93/1995 states
that staff of the CA may not disclose any professional information regarding FBOs. There
are also restrictions on the right to information due to private interest in Article 5 of the
Information Act (IS) No 50/1996. According to the General Penal Code No 19/1940
(article 136), a civil servant or former civil servant revealing work sensitive information
may be subject to imprisonment.
Annual reports are published on MAST website, https://www.mast.is/is/um-mast/utgefid-
efni/skyrslur.

                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 13

   1.4. Enforcement measures
Measures in case of non-compliance
The Food Act (IS) 93/1995 does include enforcement measures. MAST has developed
detailed guidelines on how to follow up non-compliant cases.
Depending on the seriousness of a case, the inspectors may choose to use the following
measures listed in article 30 in the Act on Food (IS) No 93/1995: is sue safeguards or
precaution; inform the general public of the nature of the risk to health; order
decontamination of food; stop or limit the production and placing on the market of food,
detain food and/or destroy it; shut down the activities of a food business; and withdraw
the operating licence.
While MAST and LCAs do have legal powers to impose daily fines until the corrective
action has been implemented and they have been used. The daily fines issued by the
CAs are subject to Regulation (IS) No 767/2010, which stipulates the maximum fines per
day of 500.000 ISK. The daily fines are subject to an administrative complaint to the
MoFAF. Serious infringements may be reported to the police and eventually to the courts
for possible measures under criminal law.
The CAs may also order tasks to be performed at the expense of the business
responsible for executing the task. Such costs and daily fines may be collected without a
prior judgment or settlement.
Sanctions
Sanctions, as described in Article 139 Regulation (EC) No 2017/625, may be imposed by
the court. Article 31 of the Food Act (IS) No 93/1995 provides for a maximum
imprisonment of 4 years in case of serious or repeated violations of law. There are no
limits set out in law regarding the amounts of fines. Serious infringements may be
reported to the police and eventually to the courts for possible measures under criminal
law.
The legal basis for sanctions is the Act (IS) No 93/1995 on Food (see Article 31), Act (IS)
No 22/1994 on Feed, Fertilizer and Seed and Act (IS) No 55/2013 on Animal Welfare.
Administrative fines are not authorized in the Food Act No 93/1995. They are, however,
authorized in the Act on Animal Welfare No 55/2013 (Article 42), in the Act on inspection
of Feed, Fertilizer and Seed No 22/1994 (Article 9g).


   1.5. Verification and review of official controls
Verification procedures
MAST has several mechanisms in place to verify the effectiveness and appropriateness
of official controls.
Senior officers and senior veterinary officers at the Division of Coordination are
responsible for harmonisation of official controls, general harmonization between sectors
and general implementation and training of new control procedures.
The official control time (number of hours) for all establishments producing food of animal
origin and feed is estimated through the same risk classification system to ensure a
harmonized evaluation of the risk across sectors, the appropriate allocation of resources
for official controls across sectors and to ensure the effective implementation of official
controls. The system also ensures that the official controls allocated to each FBO are
based on transparent and sound criteria and that the FBOs’ risk and performance is
evaluated in the same manner, without regard to the sector they belong to or their
geographical location. Both MAST and LCAs are responsible to implement, maintain, and
review the system.


                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 14

All control staff across sectors work according to the same general documented
procedures which are established in MAST´s Quality Manual. During harmonization
efforts and inspections with control staff, the officers responsible check whether control
staff are using the appropriate procedures, they help them to effectively implement these
procedures in their work and they ensure that the procedures are followed in a consistent
manner. Regular meetings are also held with control staff to ensure the appropriate
implementation and effectiveness of the controls. MAST has established several teams in
different fields of its controls and operation. Their purpose is, amongst others, to
coordinate official control, practical training and review the control system regularly to
ensure effectiveness.
Through the database IsLeyfur the progress and results of official controls can be
monitored and extrapolated. Information is collected on for example the progress of
official controls in all sectors, harmonization between inspectors, frequencies and types of
non-compliances. Results are continually monitored, and they are also collected and
compiled in a more systematic manner for review.
The LCAs shall report annually on the progress of their official controls of the previous
year. Guidelines are in place for the harmonized reporting on official controls from the
LCAs.
During seasonal slaughtering the veterinary officer of farm animal products responsible
for regular official control meat processing and slaughterhouses visits all slaughterhouses
to verify controls being done and assess the general conditions.
An evaluation of the effectiveness of official controls is also due to be examined through
long term against strategic objectives and operational objectives in MANCP and
objectives in regulations. Some indicators have been established to evaluate whether the
long-term objectives are being achieved.
Audit system (internal or external audit)
An internal audit system has been developed and approved by the Ministry of Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries (MoFAF). The system is based on the requirements of
Commission Notice 2021/C 66/02 on audit guidelines and the ISO 19011:2018 standard.
The Quality Manager of MAST is responsible for the internal audit process as the Audit
body supervisor, under the authority of an audit committee and an audit steering
committee. The internal audit teams consist of MAST senior officers who have received
training as internal auditors at Better Training for Safer Food (BTSF) training on audit
systems and internal auditing, some also attended a TAIEX seminar on internal audits of
official controls and a BSI training course was held for auditors in Iceland in 2016.
Furthermore, the Quality Manager (the audit body supervisor) is a certified ISO
9001:2015 Lead auditor. The audit team consists of 4 auditors.
The audit steering committee is responsible for the internal audit system and receives
consultation and assistance from the audit committee. The audit committee approves the
annual audit plans, evaluates the audit system and suggests changes based on their
assessment to ensure an independent scrutiny of the audit process. The follow-up of
audit results is the responsibility of the audit body supervisor who ensures that remedies
are made when weaknesses are found in the control system.
A five-year plan (multi-annual national internal audit plan (MANIAP)) is issued and
approved by the audit steering committee and covers responsibilities based on
Regulation (EC) No 2017/625 and responsible authorities, i.e., MAST, LCAs,
Laboratories and the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries. An annual risk-based
audit plan is also developed and approved by the audit committee, which is based on the
multi-annual programme, as well as any recent developments, previous audit findings
and identified risk areas. Each control area should be audited once every five years.




                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 15

Iceland participates in a joint independent scrutiny system set up by the Nordic countries
(Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland) and the audit system has undergone 2
independent scrutinies in the last 5 years.
Auditing of Vottunarstofan TÚN
MAST audits TÚN once a year to check if it performs controls in an objective and efficient
ways. The audits include an annual document review and office audit.

   1.6. Multi-annual national control plan (MANCP) and annual reports
MAST has published an implemented MANCP for 2023-2025. The development of the
MANCP will be an on-going process and it will be revised and improved as needed.
MAST reports to SANTE Data Collection Platform as required in article 113 in regulation
EB/2017/625 and regulation EB/2019/723.
Each year MAST also publishes on its website mast.is an Annual Report which provides
information on the work done in the previous year and results of controls.




                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 16
      Table 2. Overview of the distribution of re sponsi bilities in relation to control systems and operational levels.

                                              Co-
                             Policy                      Implementation                                                                    Risk assessment,
            Sector                        ordination                                        Laboratories
                          co-ordination                    of controls                                                                      scientific advice
                                          of controls
      1. Animal Health       MoFAF          MAST             MAST            The Institute for experimental pathology at        MAST and the Institute for experimental
                                                                                                Keldur                                  pathology at Keldur
      2. Food of             MoFAF          MAST             MAST                         Matís Laboratory                        Risk assessment committee for food,
         Animal Origin                                                       The Institute for experimental pathology at       feed, fertilizer and seeds MAST and Mat ís
                                                                                                Keldur                                           Laboratory
                                                                              Sýni ehf, Kópavogur, Syni ehf, Akureyri
      3. Imports of          MoFAF          MAST             MAST                          Matís Laboratory
         animal and                                                          The Institute for experimental pathology at                        MAST
         food of animal                                                                         Keldur
         origin

      4. Feedingstuffs       MoFAF          MAST             MAST                       Syni ehf, Kópavogur.                     Risk assessment committee for food,
                                                                                               LUFA                                feed, fertilizer and seeds, MAST


      5. TSEs                MoFAF          MAST             MAST            The Institute for experimental pathology at        MAST and the Institute for experimental
                                                                                      Keldur, Matís Laboratory                          pathology at Keldur
      6. ABP                MoFAF           MAST             MAST            The Institute for experimental pathology at        MAST and the Institute for experimental
                            MoEEC                            US T                     Keldur, Matís Laboratory                          pathology at Keldur
                                                             LCA
      7. Veterinary           MoH            MoH           Icelandic
         medicines                                         Medicines
         -                                                  Agency                                                                          MAST and IMA
         authorisation,
         marketing and
         distribution
          Veterinary         MoFAF          MAST             MAST          Livsmedels verket Sweden, Eurofins Sweden,
          medicines                                                        Födevarestyrelsen Danmark, LUFA Germany.,
          - residues




                                                                                                                           Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 17
      8. Foodstuffs        MoFAF   MAST   MAST                Matís Laboratory,                      Risk assessment committee for food,
         and                         )    LCA    The Institute for experimental pathology at           feed, fertilizer and seeds, MAST
         Food hygiene                                               Keldur
                                                            Syni ehf, Kopavogur,
                                                              Syni ehf, Akurey ri
      9. Imports of        MoFAF   MAST   MAST                                                                      MAST
         food of plant
         origin
      10. Plant            MoEEC   US T   US T                      N/A                                        MAST and US T
          protection
          products -
          authorisation,
          marketing and
          use
          Plant            MoFAF   MAST   LCA                Matís Laboratory
          protection
          products -
          residues
      11. Animal           MoFAF   MAST   MAST                      N/A                                             MAST
          Welfare
      12. Plant Health     MoFAF   MAST   MAST                      N/A                                             MAST
      13. Organic          MoFAF   MAST   TUN                Matís Laboratory                                       MAST
          production                      MAST
                                          LCA




                                                                                               Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 18



 2 Organisation of responsibilities in relation to control systems
   2.1 Control system for animal health




MAST        Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MARK        Livestock database
MoFAF       Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
NRL         National Reference Laboratory
The EEA legislation on veterinary matters applies to Iceland, except for the provisions
concerning live animals, other than fish and aquaculture animals, and certain products.
Council Directive 2006/88/EC on animal health requirements for aquaculture and its
products and the prevention and control of certain diseases has been fully transposed.
Act (IS) No 25/1993 on animal diseases covers control of infectious major animal
diseases including those for which EU legislation exists. Iceland prohibits import of live
animals except of live fish, fish germplasm, crustaceans and molluscs. Iceland
participates in the Animal Diseases Notification System (ADNS).
Iceland has transposed Directive No 2003/99/EC on the monitoring of zoonoses and
zoonotic agents and Regulation (EC) No 2160/2003 on the control of salmonella and
                                                          Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 19



other specified food-borne zoonotic agents. Iceland has in place a National control
programme for both Salmonella and Campylobacter in poultry production with a zero
tolerance for all Salmonella serovars. Meat from Salmonella-positive broilers is not
allowed to be distributed and therefore, flocks are destroyed, and meat from
Campylobacter-positive broilers must be frozen. Furthermore, Iceland has in place a
National control programme for Salmonella in pigs.
Competent authorities and animal health controls
MAST, in conjunction with MoFAF, is responsible for surveillance, contingency plans, and
preventive measures against animal diseases. The CA seeks to eradicate endemic
disease, control the transmission of infectious agents and improve the general health and
welfare of animals.
Inspections are typically carried out by DVOs or OVs according to: Act (IS) No 25/1993
on Animal Diseases and Preventive Measures; Act (IS) No 66/1998 on Veterinarians and
Animal Health Services; and Act (IS) No 38/2013 on Livestock Management (fish farming,
cattle, pigs and poultry).
Holding registration, animal identification and movement controls
Iceland has transposed the EU legislation on identification and registration of cattle
(Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000), pigs (Directive No 2008/71/EC) and sheep and goats
(Regulation (EC) No 21/2004). EU rules for horses are not covered by the EEA
Agreement.
Farm holdings are registered in a national interface (MARK), the operation of which
MAST oversees. The Icelandic Agricultural Centre manages its daily operation as well as
its further development.
Act (IS) No 38/2013 on livestock management and Regulation (IS) No 916/2012 on
identification of livestock lay down the principles for animal identification and registration
of their movement.
The identification system for animals is based on ear tagging. Records are maintained on
farm registers and databases for domestic animals. Information in MARK is retrieved from
databases used by the Farmers Association for breeding purposes. All stakeholders have
access to information in MARK and keepers of livestock are required to keep their
records updated. Livestock keepers are also responsible for recording diseases
identified, medical treatments and preventive measures. When livestock is transported, a
copy of their health-card must accompany them.
A livestock database - BUSTOFN - in operation since November 2010, is primarily for
livestock owners (cattle, sheep, goats and horses) to enter information on the numbers of
their livestock and other related information. This database will be connected to MARK
and other livestock databases (HUPPA (bovine), FJARVIS (ovine) and FENGUR
(horses)). BUSTOFN is accessible to all on MAST website. Personal information on
livestock owners is restricted to designated persons.
Livestock keepers are responsible for keeping records of all animals in their herd in a
herd-book. The herd-book and health-card records have to be retained for at least 10
years, even if production stops. If requested by the DVO, keepers must provide
information on origin and destination of all animals in their ownership, animals produced
and sold as live animals and slaughtered animals.
Identification mark and traceability
Control on the application of identification marks is included in MAST inspection tasks.
Traceability control is also included in inspection procedures. Identification and
registration rules per animal species are as follows:


                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 20



Cattle
Bovine animals must be identified according to Regulation (IS) No 916/2012 and
Regulation (IS) No 968/2011 incorporating Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 on the
identification of bovines with later amendments.
Sheep and goats
Ovine and caprine animals must be identified according to Regulation (IS) No 916/2012
and Regulation (IS) No 973/2011, incorporating Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 on the
identification of ovines and caprines.
However, in the implementation regulation, farmers are only required to put identification
tag in one ear of sheep and goats. When ovine or caprine animals are sold between
herds, they have to be identified with two tags. Sheep may be moved within a region
without a movement document (e.g., during the summer, animals may be moved to
highland grazing and returned to their home farm in the autumn).
National programmes (surveillance, prevention and eradication of fish disease).
A Fish Disease Committee has been established to provide advice for the MoIFAFand for
MAST regarding problems related to fish diseases. The chairman of the Committee is the
CVO and other representatives are experts from the national laboratory at Keldur, the
Institute of Fresh Water Fisheries, the Directorate of Fisheries and the Marine Research
Institute. All fish farms have been included in the official national health control
programme since 1985. The surveillance also includes farms producing wild salmon.
Since 1993, EEA legislation on disease control measures has been followed, an d since
December 2008 with the implementation of Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October
2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and
on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals (Regulatio n (IS) No
1254/2008). Canadian requirements have been respected since 2003. Surveillance is
partly carried out by regular "on-site" health inspections, under the supervision of the
veterinary officer for fish diseases, and partly via laboratory work at the official fish
disease laboratory at Keldur in Reykjavík which has close co-operation with the EU
Reference Laboratory (EURL) on virus diseases in Denmark. Surveillance takes place
with a focus on: Viral Haemorrhagic Septicaemia (VHS); Infectious Haematopo ietic
Necrosis (IHN); Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis (IPN); Pancreas Disease (PD/SAV);
Cardiomyopathy syndrome (CMS/PMCV); Infectious Salmon Anaemia (ISA) and Bacterial
Kidney Disease (BKD) (notifiable diseases under Act (IS) No 25/1993). Only Bacterial
Kidney Disease has been detected. The veterinary officer for fish also deals with mollusc
and crustacean diseases.
All infectious diseases of concern in the aquaculture industry are of bacterial origin,
mainly in the farming of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), Arctic char (Salvelinus alpinus)
and Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua). The main bacterial diseases are: Atypical furunculosis
(Aeromonas salm. ssp. achromogenes); Bacterial Kidney Disease (BKD - Renibacterium
salmoninarum); Winter ulcers (Moritella viscosa); Enteric Redmouth (Yersinia ruckeri);
Vibriosis (Vibrio anguillarum); and Cold water vibriosis (Vibrio salmonicida). All of these
diseases except BKD, are effectively controlled by vaccines. Iceland has carried out an
active eradication programme against BKD since 1985 including: a ban on transport and
trade; sanitation/disinfection; fallowing and surveying period before the farm is permitted
to recommence trade. Up to date no clinical notifiable viral fish disease has been
detected in Iceland, but through the national monitoring program of both wild and farmed
fish some fish viruses have been isolated. With viral screening of the Atlantic salmon
stock some few samples have been found to be positive for the low/non-pathogen ISAv
(HPR0). VHS virus was for the first time detected in lumpfish of wild origin in Iceland in
October 2015 although this detection did not have a connection to the salmonid
aquaculture farm sites. IPN virus has been detected, but still restricted in its distribution to

                                                   Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 21



localized marine environment. Aquatic birnavirus was for the first time isolated from
Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus) in 1999, but in late 2019 an avirulent marine
IPNV was for the first time detected in farmed Atlantic salmon in a sea-cage farm of the
east coast of Iceland. There has never been evidence of IPN disease at freshwater sites
and Iceland is regarded as being free from IPN.
Contingency plans
MAST has a generic contingency plan for foreign animal diseases, which is extended to
specific disease situations. The contingency plan for animal health is published on
MAST´s website.
In the event of an outbreak of a serious contagious animal disease, MAST is the national
disease control centre and its district offices act as the local disease control centres.
Assistance is to be provided by Keldur laboratory (see below).
A memorandum of understanding on animal health emergencies has been signed by the
competent authorities in the Nordic and Baltic countries. The aim is to provide support
and assistance to the countries concerned affected by an animal disease outbreak when
resources are not sufficient to meet the needs of the outbreak emergency. Simulation and
other training exercises are performed on a regular basis.
In cases of food-borne diseases, infectious animal diseases of zoonotic nature,
emergencies and crisis, MAST co-operates with the Chief Epidemiologist, who is
responsible to the MoH. MAST co-operates with the LCAs and coordinates the work. In
such cases, the Joint Committee on Health Security and Communicable Disease Control
reviews the situation and decides whether a given situation should be considered an
emergency or a crisis.
Laboratories
The Institute for experimental pathology at Keldur is responsible for diagnosis of diseases
in animals. It has an advisory role for MAST regarding animal diseases (Act (IS) No
67/1990). A bio-safety level 3 laboratory facility was built following the Avian Influenza
outbreaks in Europe. The institute has made agreements with the Danish National
Veterinary Institute, Swedish National Veterinary Institute and the Veterinary Laboratory
Agency in the UK, covering services urgently needed to confirm or rule out suspicion of
an outbreak of an exotic or other animal virus disease.
The Keldur laboratory has an agreement with the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
to provide capacity, technical assistance and human resources in the case of a crisis.
The diseases covered by the agreement of January 2003 are foot-and-mouth disease;
swine vesicular disease; classical and African swine fever and virus enteritis in pigs; and
other high risk infectious diseases of group A in animals, as far as the capacity of DTU
permits. The diagnostic service covered by the agreement of October 2004 is to confirm
or rule out suspicion of an outbreak of the exotic fish virus diseases: Infectious Salmon
Anemia; Infectious Haematopoietic Necrosis; Viral Haemorrhagic Septicaemia; Salmonid
Alpha Virus and Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis.
Viral analyses are also carried out at the Food, Veterinary and Environment Agency of
the Department of Fish and Animal Diseases in Faroe Islands and PatoGen Analyse in
Norway.




                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 22



   2.2. Control system for food of animal origin




DoF          Directorate of Fisheries
FBO          Food Business Operator
LCAs         Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices
MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Competent authorities
MAST is responsible for food safety controls covering primary production, official control
in slaughterhouses, cutting plants, meat plants, dairy plants, egg packaging centres, egg
processing plants, fish processing plants and vessels and control of live bivalve molluscs,
as well as control of food import and export.

MAST has a contract with the Directorate of Fisheries. According to the contract the DoF
should carry out surveillance on the hygiene of fishing boats and handling of fish at
landing sites and notify MAST if DoF recognise serious findings. During summer DoF
measure the temperature of fish at landing and sends the reports to MAST.

MAST supervises the work of the LCAs who are by law responsible for controls of the
retail market, including meat and fish processing in retail outlets, food businesses
producing food of non-animal origin and food businesses producing composed food
(processed food of animal origin and of plant origin).



                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 23



MAST can also assign some of its tasks to LCAs by a formal contract. The tasks that can
be contracted out include the approval of the FBOs, the official controls and the collection
of control fees.

Registration and approval of establishments and vessels
According to Act (IS) No 93/1995 on Foodstuffs, primary producers of food of animal
origin must be approved following an application and official control visit, except for
premises for sheep production and horse farms, which should only be registered. All food
producing and processing establishments (including freezer vessels and factory vessels)
must be approved by MAST and other fishing vessels only need to be registered.
Applications for producing food of animal origin, as the main production, are accounted
for, by the district offices. The district offices are responsible for the approval audits,
issuing approval and official control of approved establishments.
Standardised procedures for approval of establishments are established in the Quality
Manual of MAST. A list of approved establishments producing food of animal origin, is
available on MAST website.
Fish farms

Under Act (IS) No 71/2008 on Aquaculture, the responsibility for approving fish
farming facilities lies with MAST. Fish farms require two operating licenses to operate,
one from MAST and one from the Environment Agency of Iceland. The first operating
license is required from MAST which addresses factors related to the fish farming
operation such as buildings and equipment while the second operating license is required
from the Environment Agency of Iceland, according to Act (IS) No 7/1998 and Regulation
(IS) No 550/2018, which addresses environmental factors related to fish farming.

Official controls of fish farms follow a risk-based approach which takes into account the
nature of the fish farm, size and what species are farmed. An inspection manual was
issued in 2019 to further harmonize official controls.

Shellfish growers (Bivalve molluscs)
MAST is responsible for the licensing and registration of shellfish (Live Bivalve Molluscs -
LBM) growers according to Act (IS) No 90/2011 on culturing of shellfish.
MAST is also the CA for classification of harvesting areas, monitoring of toxic algae and
marine biotoxins in cooperation with the producers and approval of dispatch centres
according to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004, 2017/625 and 2019/627.
Organization and implementation of official controls
See description of risk-based prioritization and performance evaluation systems in
chapter 1.3.




                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 24



   2.3. Control system for imports of animals, germinal products and food of
        animal origin




BCP       Border Control Post
DVO       District Veterinary Officer
MAST      Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoF       Ministry of Finance
MoFAF     Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
MoI       Ministry of the Interior

                                             Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 25



The EEA legislation on imports of products of animal origin from third countries applies to
Iceland, however Iceland is exempt from Annex I of the EEA Agreement concerning trade
in live animals other than fish and aquaculture animals. This exemption also applies to
germplasm such as ova, embryos and semen.
The Importation of Animals Act No 54/1990 covers provisions on control of imports of live
animals. In general, all imports of animals and germplasms is prohibited. However, the
Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority may derogate from the general ban provided that
the instructions entailed in the Act and Regulations issued on its basis are strictly
observed. Specific regulations apply to imports of the following: pets (Regulation NO
200/2020), porcine semen (Regulation No. 859/2002), bovine semen/embryos
(Regulation No. 850/2015). In the case of importation of species that are alien to Iceland,
an import permit from The Environment Agency (UST) is required.
Importation of raw meat and raw eggs from third countries is subject to an import permit
from MAST in accordance with Act on Animal Diseases (No. 25/1993).
Veterinary checks are in line with Regulation (EU) 2017/625 on official controls and other
official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal
health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products.
The deadline for completion of the rejection procedure for non-compliant consignments is
limited to 60 days.
Table 3. BCPs in Iceland


  Name of the BCP          Type                           Approval
                                          EFTA Surveillance Authority Decision


 Hafnarfjörður           Port       POA-HC(2)(3), POA-NHC-NT(1)(2)

 Keflavík                Airport    POA-HC(2), POA-NHC(2), LA-O(15)

 Reykjavík (Eimskip)     Port       POA-HC(2), POA-NHC(2), PNAO-HC(2)

 Reykjavík (Samskip)     Port       POA-HC(2), POA-NHC(2), PNAO-HC(2)


 Þorlákshöfn             Port       POA-HC-T(FR)(2)(3), POA-HC-NT(1), POA-NHC-
                                    NT(1)

Competent authorities
MAST's Office for Import and Export is responsible for control of animal products and live
aquaculture animals at the Border Control Posts (BCPs). National border control facilities
are operated by MAST at Keflavik International Airport for the control of importation of pet
animals (cats and dogs). Iceland Revenue and Icelandic Revenue and Customs is
responsible for checks of personal luggage for travellers. The Coast Guard is responsible
for monitoring vessels in national waters. MAST is in cooperation with Iceland Revenue
and Icelandic Revenue and Customs as regards filtering out consignments for inspection
by MAST.
Monthly information meetings are held between MAST and the Icelandic Revenue and
Customs to review working methods, ensure coordination and transparency.

                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 26



Import controls
Import controls of products of animal origin and live aquaculture animals from third
countries is in accordance with EU legislation. For imports of food of animal origin, pre-
notifications are received through the TRACES system. MAST has access or receives
cargo manifests from freight companies for crosscheck purposes.
Consignments that are not notified through TRACES but require MAST approval are
identified in the customs computer system (using the CN codes).Upon notification
through the MAST service portal, the necessary checks are performed. . For cross check
purposes, MAST receives lists of consignments of food of animal origin from Iceland
Revenue and Customs and then filters information according to the origin of the
consignments: EEA or third countries.
MAST regularly organises seminars for Iceland Revenue and Customs on import controls
and on the different procedures for release of a consignment from BCPs, either for free
circulation, for channelling, re-import or for transit.
Veterinary checks on food of animal origin
The main legislation governing importation of products of animal origin is Act (IS) No
93/1995 on foods Act (IS) No 22/1994 on control of Feed, Fertilisers and Seed, Act (IS)
No 25/1993 on Animal Diseases and their Prevention; Regulation (IS) No 637/2021 on
import of aquaculture animals (entry into force of Regulation (EC) No 2020/2236),
Regulation (IS) No 1044/2011 on veterinary checks on imports of products of animal
origin from third countries and Regulation (IS) No 234/2020 (entry into force of Regulation
(EU) 2017/625).
The frequency of veterinary checks on products of animal origin is determined according
to Regulation (IS) No 1044/2011 that is in line with Implementing Regulation (EU)
2019/2129.
The frequency of laboratory tests on consignments is in accordance with a monitoring
plan. The plan is based on the nature of the products and the risk they present, taking
into account all relevant monitoring parameters, such as: frequency; number of incoming
consignments and results of previous monitoring. The monitoring plan is revised annually.
Following satisfactory documentary, identity and physical checks, a Common Health
Entry Document (CHED) is issued. The importer subsequently takes the clearance import
documents to customs for release of their goods.
Rejections
In the case of discrepancies detected or where requirements for importation in
accordance with Regulation (IS) No 1044/2011 and 234/2020 (Regulation (EU) 2017/625)
are not met, the consignment is rejected. In case of rejection, an announcement of a
pending decision of rejection is sent to the importer. The importer has the right to object.
Thereafter a decision of rejection is sent to the importer, who subsequently has the right
to appeal to the MoFAF.
Fish – direct landing
For direct landings of frozen fish products from third country vessels, pre-notifications are
received through the TRACES system. In the case of freezer vessel from a third country,
a captain's declaration is required, while a health certificate is required from a factory
vessel.
Personal imports
Travellers may bring products of animal origin from countries within the EEA, Andorra,
Liechtenstein, San Marino and Switzerland, and certain products from other countries


                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 27



(Article 2 in national Regulation (IS) No 1251/2019, in line with Regulation (EU)
2019/2122).
Transit / transhipments of consignments
The freight companies notify transhipments of products of animal origin to MAST. Time
limits for such consignments are followed up and documented by MAST. Transhipments
take place at Reykjavík Eimskip and Keflavik airport.
Customs warehouses and ship suppliers
Neither approved customs warehouses nor ship chandlers exist in Iceland.




                                              Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 28



   2.4. Control system for feeding stuffs and animal nutrition




IMA         Icelandic Medicines Agency
MAST        Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF       Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
FBO         Feed Business Operator

Competent Authorities
MAST is the CA responsible for official controls on feed. MAST may assign some tasks to
LCAs. Informal co-operation is also in place with the Icelandic Medicines Agency
regarding the definition of "feed" and "medicine" where there may be an overlap and with
the Customs Authorities regarding imports.
Inspections are carried out by MAST according to Act (IS) No 22/1994 on control of feed,
fertilisers and seeds and Regulation (EC) No 2017/625 on official controls to verify
compliance to Regulations (EC) No 183/2005 on feed hygiene, (EC) No 1069/2009 on
animal by-products, (EC) No 767/2009 on placing on the market and use of feed, (EC) No
1831/2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition and (EC) No 159/2009 laying down the
methods of sampling and analysis for the official control of feed, Directive (EC) No
32/2002 on undesirable substances in animal feed.
MAST official controls are focused on verification of internal quality management systems
and sampling for FBOs in the higher risk groups. Control of the lower risk groups is
primarily based on registration, documentation and import control.
The surveillance of primary producers at farm level is part of the regular surveillance
system for animal welfare and production on farms.
Medicated feed controls
Iceland has implemented Council Directive 90/167/EEC laying down the conditions
governing the preparation, placing on the market and use of medicated feeding stuffs in
the Community. The directive was implemented through two national Regulations (IS) No
608/2013 for production and placing on the market and use of medicated feeding stuffs
for fish, crustaceans and molluscs and (IS) No 607/2013 for production and placing on


                                               Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 29



the market of medicated feeding stuffs for animals. These Regulations will be repealed
with the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 4/2019.
The surveillance of medicated feeding stuffs is under the supervision of the Icelandic
Medicines Agency. The medicines shall be mixed in pre-mixtures before they are mixed
into the feed that is combined with normal feed. The preparation of the medicated feeding
stuffs shall only be done by specially authorised feed operators.
Enforcement
The legal basis for sanctions in cases of infringement is contained in Act (IS) No 22/1994
on control of feed, fertilisers and seeds. Documented procedures are in place in MAST
Quality Manual on actions taken in cases of infringements.
Laboratories
MAST cooperates with two laboratories for analysis of feed:
      LUFA Nord-West Institut für Futtermittel in Germany can undertake a range of
       analysis, in their own laboratories or contract laboratories. It is accredited by
       Deutscher Akkreditierungs Rat (DAR). The scope of accreditation covers all
       methods used, except for fluorine analysis for which method - CEN/TC 327 N620
       (Entwurf) is used.
      Syni ehf, Kopavogur, is used for analysis of Salmonella. It is accredited for
       analysis of most common substances and microorganisms in accordance with the
       IST EN ISO/IEC 17025 standard. The laboratory analyses Salmonella with the
       following methods: NMKL Nr. 71, 5. edition 1999 and Vidas Salmonella 30702.




                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 30



   2.5. Control system for Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (TSE)




LCAs        Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices
MAST        Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoEEC       Ministry of Environment, Energy and Climate
MoFAF       Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
UST         Environment Agency of Iceland

Competent authorities
MAST is the CA for all issues concerning TSE, including import controls, animal health
controls, surveillance, monitoring and slaughterhouse controls based on EEA legislation.
The Environment Agency (UST) is the CA for issues concerning disposal of contagious
animal waste. UST co-operates with MAST which has an overall responsibility for the
prevention of spread of animal diseases. In case of TSE the LCAs shall in co-operation
with UST and MAST recommend how and where a contagious waste will be disposed of
and how the transport of waste shall be carried out. The LCAs will also control that the
process of disposal and cleaning of equipment and vehicles, are in line with the
recommendation.
Regulation (EC) No 999/2001 on TSE was incorporated in Regulation (IS) No 41/2012.
Epidemio-surveillance
BSE has never been detected in Iceland. Since 2000 screenings have been carried out
annually. Samples are taken at slaughterhouses or farms from the following
subpopulations:
      All bovine animals displaying behavioural or clinical signs consistent with BSE,
       which MAST receives notification about.


                                               Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 31



      Bovine animals older than 48 months that have died or been culled at the farms
       due to accidents or health reasons, which MAST receives notification about.
      Bovine animals older than 48 months sent for emergency slaughter.
      All bovine animals identified as disease suspect at ante mortem inspection.
      Bovine animals older than 48 months which are rejected for human consumption
       based on ante mortem inspection or due to significant deficiencies due to lack of
       traceability or ear tags.
In 2004 Iceland was recognised as a negligible BSE risk country, by the OIE World
Assembly of Delegates and reconfirmed every year to date. According to the EEA JCD of
October 2007, an agreement was made for Iceland to implement Regulation (EC) No
999/2001 with derogation from the requirements to breed for genetic resistance (Iceland
has an eradication policy – see below). According to the agreement, only lambs that are
free of the VRQ gene may be used for repopulation on farms where scrapie has been
detected.
Scrapie has been endemic in the country since 1878. A decision was made in 1986 to
start an eradication programme. Areas where scrapie has been detected are kept under
special surveillance for 20 years. Samples are taken annually from about 4000-6000
sheep at slaughterhouses and sheep at farms displaying clinical signs compatible with
scrapie. The farmer is fully compensated for his loss for at least the two years that the
farm must remain depopulated of sheep. Disinfection procedures carried out on the farm
involve removal of all interior wooden material, hay and sheep manure from the sheep
houses and their safe disposal. This is followed by disinfection.
Total Feed Ban
Since 1968, it has been prohibited to import meat and bone meal and greaves for use in
feeding stuffs for livestock (except pet food). The current legal reference regarding import
ban of all meat and bone meal (MBM) is article 10 of Act (IS) No 25/1993. There has
been a ban on feeding MBM to ruminants since 1978 and all food-producing animals
since 2001. Fishmeal is readily available and is used as a protein source for food-
producing animals instead of MBM. Almost all compound feed for livestock is produced
domestically. The main importation is of additives, premixes and pure feed ingredients.
There have been no registered imports of compound feedstuffs since 1968.
Laboratories
Keldur is the NRL for TSEs and is responsible for analysing samples taken by MAST
officers in the field or in slaughterhouses. Keldur uses the Biorad system for routine
analysis. All suspicious samples are also tested using Western Blot and Immuno-
Histochemical methods. Some samples are sent to the EU reference laboratory for TSEs
– Veterinary Laboratories Agency (VLA) in Waybridge in the UK for confirmation.




                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 32



   2.6. Control system for Animal By-Products (ABP)




MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoEEC        Ministry of the Environment, Energy and Climate
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
UST          Environment Agency of Iceland

Competent Authorities
MAST is the CA for animal by-products. UST is the CA for burial and burning of waste
and co-operates with MAST on the issue. Regulation (EU) No 1069/2009 and 142/2011
were implemented with regulation (IS) No 674/2017. Iceland may decide to use a
derogation for remote areas (material when at the time of the disposal the Specific Risk
Material (SRM) has not been removed (category 1 material), category 2 material and
category 3 material may be disposed as waste by burning or burial on site). The definition
of remote areas has been established with regulation (IS) No 992/2019 amending
regulation (IS) 674/2017.
MAST issues approval for fish meal plants, MBM plants, feed plants using ABP, pet food
plants, technical plants and plants manufacturing organic fertilizer and soil improvers on
the basis of an inspection of the premises and own-check system. An updated list of
registered and approved ABP establishments exists and is published on MAST website.
MAST is responsible for the official controls of fish meal plants, MBM plants, feed plants
using ABP, pet food plants, technical plants and plants manufacturing organic fertiliz er
and soil improvers. Home slaughter is permitted in Iceland. All waste shall be delivered to
a facility holding a valid permit to handle waste according to Article 10 of the Waste Act
(IS) No 55/2003. However, there is not a complete system for collection of home
slaughter waste and fallen stock (with exceptions in populated areas). MAST has issued
a form for commercial documents of ABPs.
Iceland has limited incineration capacity for carcasses potentially infected with TSE.
Catering waste is currently disposed in landfill or subject to composting.


                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
    Page 33



       2.7. Control system for veterinary medicinal products (VMP) and residues
    Veterinary Medicinal Products (VMP)




    IMA          Icelandic Medicines Agency
    MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
    MoH          Ministry of Health
    MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
    VMP          Veterinary Medicinal Products

    Competent Authorities
    The Minister of Health is responsible for the implementation of legislation on VMPs.
    Controls on the production, distribution and use of VMPs are divided between the
    Icelandic Medicines Agency (IMA) and MAST. IMA is responsible for licensing of, and
    official controls on, manufacture and distribution of VMP to pharmacy level, while MAST
    is responsible for the control of VMP use by veterinary practitioners and on farms.
    Authorisation of VMP
    In accordance with the Medicinal Products Act, the IMA, an independent regulatory
    authority under the auspices of the MoHH, issues marketing authorisations for medicines.
    In most cases this is done in collaboration with regulatory authorities in the EEA.
   PVPs can make a request to a VMP wholesaler to import EU approved VMPs. This
    import needs to be pre-approved by IMA which seeks a statement from MAST when
    needed.
    Prohibited substances
    Regulation (IS) No 539/2000 on the authorisation of veterinarians to prescribe medicine
    establishes the provisions for prohibition of the use of certain substances. The legal basis
    for the Regulation is Act (IS) No 100/2020 on Medicinal Products. Chapter II of the
    Regulation contains a list of substances prohibited for use as animal treatments.
    Official controls on marketing/use of VMPs




                                                     Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
    Page 34



   The IMA is responsible for the control of manufacturing and distribution of VMPs
    according to Article 6 of Act (IS) No 100/2020. MAST supervises veterinary practitioners
    and controls the use of VMPs according to Article 45 of Act (IS) No 100/2020.
    Control of VMPs at wholesale and retail level
    According to IMA procedures, all wholesalers are inspected at least once every five
    years. There is a checklist for use during inspections of wholesalers which includes
    checks of the VMPs and purchases by PVPs.
    VMPs are distributed mainly via practicing veterinarians who purchase VMPs from the
    wholesalers for use in their own practice and operate veterinary pharmacies selling VMPs
    to animal owners. Small quantities of VMPs are also distributed through other
    pharmacies. Retailers are required to be inspected based on risk once every four to ten
    years. Checklists are used during inspection of retailers and veterinary practitioners
    operating veterinary pharmacies.
    Feed mills
    Production and distribution of medicated feed is permitted in Iceland. IMA is responsible
    for control and authorisation of manufacturers and distributors of medicated feed.
    Private veterinary practitioners (PVPs) and farms
    MAST is responsible for official controls on the proper use and storage of medicines on
    farms. Animal keepers are obliged to keep records on the health status of the animals
    and their medical treatment in a herd book for at least ten years.
   Sheep farmers in remote areas may store/administer antibiotic medicines under specified
    conditions if the farmer has a contract with a PVP for the supply of the drugs and the PVP
    has permission from the CVO.
   MAST is also responsible for the controls on the use of VMPs by PVPs. HEILSA is an
    internet-based computer system that MAST launched in the beginning of June 2011 and
    has been updated in 2022. PVPs are obliged to register the use of medicines to horses
    and cattle and have an option to register for sheep as well. The system contains
    information on animal health and veterinary treatment in animals. Registration and usage
    of the system is stated in Regulation (IS) No 303/2012.
    Links to other systems
    HEILSA is linked to the electronic herd books for sheep, cattle and horse farmers (Fjárvís,
    Huppa and WorldFengur) so the registrations are visible to the farmers. Abattoirs get an
    email from HEILSA every day with information about which animals are in a slaughter
    ban.




                                                    Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 35



  Residues




IMA          Icelandic Medicines Agency
MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
MoH          Ministry of Health
NRCP         National Residue Control Plan
VMP          Veterinary Medicinal Products
Competent authorities
MAST is responsible for monitoring residues in live animals and animal products. The
IMA has an input into the NRCP based on their data on VMP sale.

                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
    Page 36



    Official controls on residues
    Implementation of the National Residue Control Plan (NRCP)
    The NRCPs are drawn up according to EC regulations no 1644/2022, 1646/2022,
    931/2022, 932/2022 and 601/2021 and Icelandic regulation no 234/2020. The number of
    samples to be collected each year is based on annual national production from the
    previous year. The NRCPs are submitted annually to the Authority and the results of the
    NRCP are submitted annually to EFSA. MAST is responsible for supervision of the
    NRCPs. The NRCPs are reviewed and evaluated annually, when the level of risk for
    residues in certain areas and animals is considered and the distribution of samples
    throughout the year is determined, according to registrations in HEILSA, among other
    things.
    Other residue control programmes including pre-export testing
    MAST operates a monitoring programme for contaminants in feed. Dairy plants operate
    own-control programmes for residues (every delivery is tested). Non-compliant results
    can be traced back to each farm and evidence of follow-up investigations by the dairy
    plants must be reported to the DVO.
   Follow up of non- compliant results of official samples
   In the case of non-compliant results, the Veterinary Officer of Residues decides which
    follow-up actions need to be taken, according to the written procedures in MAST´s quality
    manual (VLY-102 or VLY-104) and, if necessary, informs, instructs and collaborates with
    the relevant DVO.
    Laboratories
    Six laboratories (situated in EU states/Iceland) analyse samples for MAST according to
    the Icelandic NRCP. The samples, which are analysed abroad, are compiled and
    prepared for shipment at the premises of Sýni Research Service. Information on official
    laboratories are on MAST website.




                                                   Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 37



   2.8. Control system for foodstuffs and food hygiene




MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
FBOs         Food Business Operators
LCAs         Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices

Competent authorities
The MoFAF is responsible for legislation on food safety, while the MoEEC is responsible
for legislation on environmental protection and general hygiene. MAST is responsible for
the supervision of LCA activities regarding food safety. In general, the LCAs are
supervised by MAST although it has no direct legal power over the LCAs and may not
give direct instructions or intervene in their day-to-day running. However, in cases of
food-borne disease, MAST may intervene directly. According to the Food Act (IS) No
93/1995, MAST can also issue guidelines for specific areas that the LCAs must adopt.
MAST is the CA for FBOs approved according to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 and the
LCAs are the CA for all FBOs that fall under the scope of regulation (EC) No 852/2004
and not under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 853/2004.
Official controls of food premises
Each LCA develops an annual risk-based control plan which shall be submitted to MAST
before 15. December each year. MAST compiles this information to obtain an overview
and a plan for official control is published in MANCP in the chapter operational objectives
on MAST’s website. .
An inspection manual for official controls has been issued and can be found on this link.
There is no harmonised national register or database of food establishments as each
LCA has its own register. Three LCAs use the database Isleyfur for their results of official
control.
Good Hygiene Practice Guides (GHP)
MAST, in cooperation with the LCAs, has issued general guidelines on Good Hygiene
Practices. Several other guidelines have been issued and they are all available on MAST
website. These guidelines include small waterworks, personal hygiene, guidelines for
packaging rooms etc.
                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 38



Potable water
The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries is responsible for the implementation and
application of EEA legislation on official control of potable water. Directive 98/83/EC on
the quality of water intended for human consumption, was incorporated into the Icelandic
internal legal order by Regulation (IS) No 536/2001, which entered into force on 28 June
2001. According to Article 12 of that regulation, the LCAs are responsible for official
controls under MAST’s supervision. The ten LCAs are responsible within their
municipalities for the surveillance of quality of potable water. MAST is responsible for
supervision and coordination and issuing of guidelines.
Under the responsibility of the Environment Agency (Ministry of the Environment), the
LCAs also play a role concerning provisions related to the necessary protection of the
bodies of water used for the abstraction of drinking water and shall designate protective
zones. LCAs can restrict the use of land and use and storage of polluting or dangerous
substances in relation to abstraction sites for drinking water. LCAs are responsible for the
implementation of Regulation (IS) No 796/1999 on the protection of water, Regulation (IS)
No 797/1999 on the protection of groundwater and Regulation (IS) No 804/1999 on the
protection of water from nitrogen compounds from agriculture and other businesses
under the supervision of UST.
Food contact materials (FCM)
The Ministry of Industries and Innovation is responsible for the legislation on FCMs in
Iceland. Official control of FCMs business operators (producers and importers) is under
the responsibility of the municipal control districts, the LCAs within their respective
regions. In the end of 2013, an amendment to the Food Act (IS) No 93/1995 was made
(Act (IS) No 143/2013) to clarify further the role of the LCAs regarding official control of
FCM producers and importers. The official control of users of FCMs (food business
operators) is the responsibility of the respective competent authority that is responsible
for the main activities of the establishment, i.e. either LCAs (retail level, food of non-
animal origin establishments) or MAST (food of animal origin establishments). MAST is in
charge of coordination and supervision of LCAs, issues guidelines and is responsible for
ensuring a harmonised approach for the controls by the LCAs.
RASFF
Iceland has been a full member of the RASFF system since 1994 with MAST as the
National contact point (NCP). One person is responsible at MAST but with a replacement
when needed. The system ensures that urgent notifications are sent, received and
responded to quickly. NCP is on duty and notifications monitored 24/7. (Commission
Regulation (EC) No 16/2011 established RASFF first in Article 50 of regulation (EC) No.
178/2002 and in OCR (EC) 2017/625 with IMSOC the Information Management System
for official controls to link all existing and future IT systems managed by the Commission
(e.g. TRACES, RASFF and Europhyt)).
The NCP ensures the immediate transmission of information provided by national food
and feed control authorities through the RASFF upstream to the European Commission
through iRASFF. The Efta Surveillance Authority informs Iceland’s NCP when Iceland is
mentioned in the daily notification list. Guidelines about recalls and withdrawals are in the
MAST Quality manual.
If a product (food, feed or FCM) has already been imported, action is taken to eliminate
the hazard to human or animal health. The NCP informs the LCAs or the appropriate unit
within MAST and co-ordinates the action to be taken (e.g. checks on the domestic
market, recall and withdrawal of the product by the distributor). The investigation must
take into account the distribution of the products and the nature of the notification. Details
of cases are published on MAST´s website and sent to the press. In serious cases, an


                                                  Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 39



announcement is sent to the Chief Epidemiologist in Iceland. Iceland’s response is
conveyed to the EEA Member States via the RASFF system (iRASFF).
Food fraud
Iceland has been member of EU food fraud network and participated in network meetings
from 2013. Member States and some other European countries get to exchange
information and to cooperate on a voluntary basis in matters where they are confronted
with violations of the EU agri-food chain legislation of cross-border nature.
The communication is through AAC network (administrative assistance cooperation in the
areas of food and feed) which deal with non-compliances and other violations of the EU
agri-food chain legislation. That includes food fraud which is often not a food safety
issues.
MAST has participated in Europol project Opson for many years with cooperation from
the Icelandic customs and police. A Nordic food fraud project will result in Nordic
guidelines for Food fraud published in summer 2020. A national seminar with experts
from USA was held in autumn 2019 for official inspectors at LCAs and MAST, customs
and police.
Monthly reports from EU food fraud network and regular meetings physical and online are
very useful for fighting food fraud across borders in EEA countries.




                                              Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 40



   2.9. Control system for imports of food of non-animal origin




LCAs         Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices
MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoF          Ministry of Finance
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries

Competent authorities
The Office of Import and Export of MAST is part of the division of Cooperation. The office
is responsible for import controls on food of non-animal origin in co-operation with Iceland
Revenue and Customs. In special cases the MoFAF may grant exemptions from the
provisions of the import regulation to allow import of prohibited commodities.
Import controls
The main priorities for controls on imported foodstuffs are a) monitoring of pesticide
residues b) participation in RASFF and c) documentary checks on foodstuffs where


                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 41



specific import restrictions have been laid down in EEA legislation or an import permit is
required.
MAST co-operates with Iceland Revenue and Customs to ensure that products subject to
import restrictions are not imported without documentary checks by MAST prior to import.
However, MAST has restricted access to the customs database.
MAST charges fees for approval of the import of specific products (identified by tariff
codes laid down in the relevant EEA legislation).
MAST import and export office implements and follows up the EU legislation for risk
products of non-animal origin laid down Regulation (EC) No 2017/625 and other
regulations concerning safeguard measures.
MAST inspects food of non-animal origin at the facilities of the BCPs. Samples have been
taken at BCPs according to the frequency listed in Annex 1 of Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) No 2019/1793 or other implementing EU import regulations regarding
products of non-animal origin. This was done with separation in time to avoid cross -
contamination with food of animal origin. All samples taken for analysis were packaged
consumer units.




                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 42



   2.10Control system for plant protection products (PPP) and residues
Plant protection products




MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoEEC        Ministry of Environment, Energy and Climate
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
PPPs         Plant Protection Products
UST          Environment Agency of Iceland

Competent authorities
MoEEC is responsible for the Chemical Act No 61/2013 and legislation on plant
protection products. UST is responsible for ensuring that the Chemical Act No 61/2013
are followed, and for the official control of plant protection products on the market.
Official controls on marketing/use of PPPs
All Plant protection products placed on the market in Iceland must have an authorisation
granted by UST according to Chemical Act No 61/2013 and national regulation No
544/2015 on plant protection products (implementing Regulation (EU) No 1107/2009) and
be labelled in accordance with the current regulation on classification, labelling and
packaging of substances and chemical mixtures.
UST carries out official control of plant protection products on the market. Official control
can be a part of implemented market surveillance plan, control where data are requested
(written control) or control following a report on possible violation. In the event of non-
compliance, a follow-up case is established where the requirements for corrective action
are stressed, and the use of coercive measure or administrative fines can be applied.
Products that don’t comply with legislation regarding authorisation, labelling, packaging
etc. may be removed from the market.
The marketing of PPPs for professional use must be notified to UST. A user permit issued
by UST is required for professional use of PPPs. Import statistics on PPPs pesticides are
collected by UST through data received from Iceland Revenue and Customs and
importers. Distributors must provide information on sales of PPPs for professional use.

                                                 Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 43



A register of PPPs is available in UST´s website.
Obsolete pesticides
The UST can confiscate any obsolete PPPs found on the market. Stocks of obsolete
PPPs are treated as hazardous waste.

Residues




FBOs         Food Business Operators
LCAs         Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices
MAST         Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries

Competent authorities
MoFAF is responsible for setting maximum residue levels (MRLs) of pesticides and
legislation on control of pesticide residues. MAST is responsible for pesticide residue
monitoring programmes. The control of primary producers of vegetables and berries and
of importers as well as sampling and enforcement actions when needed are carried out
by the LCAs.
Official controls on residues
Sampling and monitoring plans
A multiannual sampling plan for pesticide residues, drawn up by MAST, is in place for the
national monitoring programme. The sampling plan is based on import volumes and
domestic production and past results from the monitoring programme. It also takes
account of the products where pesticide residues are most often found and the co-
ordinated EU monitoring programme.
Reykjavik LCA and Hafnarfjörður LCA and Suðurnes LCA carry out all sampling and
enforcement on imported products as almost all products are channelled through their
regions where samples are taken at the importer´s warehouses. An annual sampling
plan, based on the multi-annual sampling plan, is drawn up by MAST. About 13% of
samples on the plan are to be from domestic production, taken by the relevant LCA, at
retail level, or during inspection at the farm.


                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 44



Enforcement
When a pesticide residue exceeds the MRL, enforcement action is taken if the pesticide
residues in the sample exceed the MRL in addition to measurement uncertainty of the
analysis. Provisions on MRLs are contained in Regulation (IS) No 672/2008 on maximum
levels of pesticide residues in food and feed, incorporating relevant EEA legislation.




                                              Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 45



   2.11.      Control system for animal welfare




MAST        Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority
MoFAF       Ministry of Food Agriculture and Fisheries

Competent authorities
MAST is responsible for animal welfare and for ensuring that the Animal Welfare Act (IS)
No 55/2013 and secondary regulations are followed. Iceland is not obliged to implement
the EU acquis regarding animal welfare except rules concerning protection of animals at
the time of killing. Regulation (EC) No 1099/2009 on the protection of animals at the time
of killing has been incorporated with Regulation (IS) No 911/2012.
The system of official controls on animal welfare in Iceland is shown in figure 2.11. MAST
commonly gets notification of concern from the public through a “notification button” on
MAST web page. Animal farms are inspected according to a risk-based assessment. All
notifications from public are registered electronically in MAST system and followed up by
Animal Welfare Inspectors (AWIs) or OVs. The majority of inspections consists of routine
inspections performed by OVs and AWIs at farms and in different animal holdings in their
region. OVs perform daily official controls of animal welfare in slaughterhouses and

                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 46



DVOs, OVs and AWIs routine inspections/audits, occasionally with senior veterinary
officers from central office for coordination purposes between districts. Senior officers
from the Division of coordination (have the responsibility of supervising coordination
between districts for inspections and follow up.
All inspections are registered, and reports written in the database IS-leyfur that also
keeps records of follow ups. If needed cases are transferred to an adhoc team of the
DVO, VO for the animal species and a lawyer for enforcement.
Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 on the protection of animals during transport and related
operations is not applicable to Iceland under the EEA Agreement. However, Regulation
(IS) No 527/2017 is to a large extent based on Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005,
including a registration system for licensed haulers.




                                               Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 47



   2.12 Control system for organic production




MAST is the competent authority for organic production in Iceland. MAST has delegated
the authority to carry out official controls of organic operators to the Control Body
Vottunarstofan Tún according to an agreement between the two parties.
A list of certified operators can be found on TUN´s homepage
Sampling of organic products is under the responsibility of TÚN as a part of official
monitoring on certified operators, both sampling and additional audits are based on a risk
assessment.
Official controls on food on the market and labelling of food is the responsibility of the
LCAs based on the Food Act No 93/1995.
MAST has further responsibility for supervisory activities based on the requirements in
Regulation (EU) No 2018/848.
MAST is the competent authority for performing import controls of organic products.




                                                Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 48



     ANNEX I – ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS AND SPECIAL TERMS

ACRONYM        DESCRIPTION
ABP            Animal By-Products
ADIS           Animal Diseases Information System
AWI            Animal Welfare Inspectors
BCP            Border Control Post / Landamærastöð
BKD            Bacterial Kidney Disease
BSE            Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
CCA            Central Competent Authority

CHED           Common Health Entry Document for products of animal origin and for live
               animals
CVO            Chief Veterinary Officer / Yfirdýralæknir
DoF            Directorate of Fisheries / Fiskistofa
DoH            Directorate of Health
DTU            Technical University of Denmark
DVO            District Veterinary Officer / Héraðsdýralæknir
EA             European Co-operation for Accreditation
EC             European Community
EEA            European Economic Area / Evrópska efnahagssvæðið
EEA
Agreement      Agreement on the European Economic Area

EFTA           European Free Trade Association
ESA            EFTA Surveillance Authority
EU             European Union
FBO            Food Business Operator / Feed Business Operator
FCM            Food Contact Material
FTE            Full Time Employees
GMO            Genetically Modified Organism(s)
HACCP          Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
IHN            Infectious Haematopoietic Necrosis
ILAC           International Co-operation for Laboratory Accreditation
IMA            Icelandic Medicines Agency
IPN            Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis
IRC            Icelandic Revenue and Customs / Skatturinn
IS             (unique) Establishment Number
ISA            Infectious Salmon Anaemia
ISAC           Icelandic Board for Technical Accreditation
ISO/IEC        International Standards Organisation

                                              Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 49




ACRONYM     DESCRIPTION
ISK         Icelandic currency (Krona)
ISPM        International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures
            A MAST database which contains an active list of all approved
IS-leyfur   establishments producing food of animal origin or feed and information
            concerning official controls
IT          Information technology
            Joint Committee on Health Security and Communicable Disease
JC
            Control
JCD         Joint Committee Decision
LBM         Live Bivalve Molluscs
            Local Competent Authority / Heilbrigðiseftirlit sveitarfélaga
LCA
            (Municipal Environmental and Public Health Offices)
MANCP       Multi Annual National Control Plan
MANIAP      Multi-Annual National Internal Audit Plan
MARK        Icelandic interface for Domestic Animals
MAST        The Food and Veterinary Authority / Matvælastofnun
MBM         Meat and Bone Meal
MLA         Multilateral Agreement for Laboratories
MoEEC       Ministry of the Environment, Energy and Climate
MoEd        Ministry of Education
MoF         Ministry of Finance
MoI         Ministry of Interior
MoFAF       Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
MoH         Ministry of Health
MRL         Maximum Residue Limit
MS          Member State
NCP         National Contact Point
NRCP        National Residue Control Plan
NRL         National Reference Laboratory
NMKL        Nordic Committee on Food Analysis
OIE         World organisation for animal health
OV          Official Veterinarian
PONAO       Products of non-animal origin
PPP         Plant Protection Product(s)
PVP         Private Veterinary Practitioner
RASFF       Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed
            The Association of Regional Health and Environment Authorities
SHÍ
            / Samtök heilbrigðiseftirlitssvæða á Íslandi

                                            Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
Page 50




ACRONYM       DESCRIPTION
SRM           Specified Risk Material
SWEDAC        Swedish Board for Accreditation and Conformity Assessment
TAIEX         Technical Assistance and Information Exchange instrument
TRACES        Trade Control and Expert System
TSE           Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy
UK            United Kingdom
UST           Environment Agency of Iceland
VHS           Viral Haemorrhagic Septicemia
VLA           Veterinary Laboratories Agency
VMP           Veterinary Medicinal products
Worldfengur   Equine Database (owned by the breeders)




                                          Country Profile Iceland Part 1 / April 2023
