RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.global-challenges.com

Food Waste Governance Architectures in Europe: Actors,
Steering Modes, and Harmonization Trends
Julia Szulecka,* Carrie Bradshaw,* and Ludovica Principato*
handling and storage, processing and
packaging, distribution, and ﬁnally – consumption) and their interactions. Typical causes of food waste and loss diﬀer
within the stages of the food value chain
and further depend on economic development, climate, culture, diet, or popular
food products. For agricultural production, typical causes are spillage and quality standards, agricultural policies, and labor costs. For post-harvest handling it is
also spillages, degradation, interruptions,
and food produce damage. Processing,
packaging, and transport bring degradation, market rejections and spillage. In
distribution, food waste is caused by legal
restrictions and aesthetic requirements.
At the consumption stage, typical causes
are poor planning, oversized portions,
lack of awareness and understanding of
date marking, and bulk purchases.[1] The
problem cannot be solved with mere incremental change and cannot be fully
addressed by the actors individually; it
requires system-level reductions and collaboration within the
food value chains, and targets have emerged as a fundamental
governance tool at the international, regional, and national level
to galvanize action for food waste prevention.
Importantly, Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Target 12.3
provides that per capita global food waste at retail and consumer levels should be halved by 2030, with reductions in
food losses along production and supply chains (including postharvest losses).[2] Although there is a broad consensus to prevent
food waste in line with the SDG 12.3 target, and legally binding
targets are also expected, e.g., at the European Union level,[3] the
work toward fulﬁllment of the goal indicates a considerable variation among countries, sectors, and stages in the value chain. The
common framework of the so-called waste hierarchy model deﬁnes preferred (prevention and reduction of waste) and less preferred (recycling, recovery, and disposal) waste governance strategies but does not deﬁne any concrete governance tools and actors
responsibilities.[4]
The food waste problem “has made a signiﬁcant climb on
governance agendas since 2010”[5] and this is equally visible in
macro-targets and in the layers of regional and (sub)national
regulation. However, it is often claimed that because of ad-hoc,
fragmented governance arrangements, and limited ambition, national eﬀorts are insuﬃcient to meet the global target.[6–10]
Meanwhile, the discussion of food waste reduction governance
is often one-dimensional, focused on the mere presence of food

The scale of food waste across Europe is alarming, and its reduction is
becoming an important public policy and governance issue. Sustainable
Development Goal Target 12.3 constitutes a global attempt to galvanize
system-level reductions. In response, layers of varied regulation and
governance at regional and national levels have emerged. This paper studies
the types of governance architectures visible across Europe, what policy
interventions they bring, and whether responses to the food waste challenge
are converging. It looks at four leading food waste jurisdictions—France,
England, Norway, and Italy—and investigates the hidden realities obscured by
the simplistic division of legislative/top-down versus voluntary/bottom-up
approaches. It applies a governance matrix to understand the variety of food
waste “steering modes”, exploring both the extent to which a regime is
hierarchical and/or non-hierarchical and why. Notably, the paper also
identiﬁes some general tendencies in food waste governance, including
legislative threats, challenges in distributing responsibility across the actors,
focus on “low hanging fruits”, and an overall harmonization of policy
responses in a neoliberal paradigm, with redistribution often pursued as a
panacea for the food waste crisis.

1. Introduction
Food waste is receiving increasing attention in both scholarship
and policy circles. Its root causes can be linked to concrete stages
in the food supply chain (agricultural production, post-harvest

J. Szulecka
Norwegian Institute for Water Research (NIVA)
Økernveien 94, Oslo 0579, Norway
E-mail: julia.szulecka@niva.no
C. Bradshaw
University of Leeds
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
E-mail: c.j.bradshaw@leeds.ac.uk
L. Principato
Department of Business Economics
Roma Tre University
Via Silvio D’Amico, 77, Rome 00145, Italy
E-mail: ludovica.principato@uniroma3.it
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/gch2.202300265
© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

DOI: 10.1002/gch2.202300265

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (1 of 11)

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

waste reduction laws, and countries that introduced them are depicted as more ambitious and receive signiﬁcant attention as apparent frontrunners. In the media, the ﬁrst European food waste
laws were dubbed as “a war on waste”, “groundbreaking” and
bringing “a revolution”.[11–13] This overly simplistic characterization creates a dichotomy between food waste laws versus their absence. Little attention is paid to more complex dynamics and to
what governance architectures actually emerge in diﬀerent countries to address food waste.
In response, this paper investigates food waste governance
by applying a two-dimensional framework to both the type of
interventions adopted, and the regimes that produce them, to
capture the variety of food waste reduction governance architectures. Crucially, it explores both the extent to which a governance architecture is top-down (“hierarchical”) and/or bottom-up
(“non-hierarchical”), but also analyses the actor constellations—
explicitly or implicitly—in play across the “public-private” divide/continuum. We ask what are the types of governance architectures visible across Europe, what policy interventions do they bring and
are responses to the food waste challenge converging?
We use a two-dimensional framework drawing from Hall
(2011) for a comparative case study analysis of four countries
which are often discussed in the food waste reduction and prevention literature as examples of apparently diﬀerent approaches.
France and Italy are widely considered paragons of a “topdown” approach because of the explicit food waste laws they
introduced,[14] in contrast to the so-called “voluntary” approaches
in the UK and Norway.[15] Our structured comparative analysis
shows the extent to which the emergent food waste reduction
governance architectures are divergent, but also in which terms
they seem to be increasingly aligning and harmonizing over time.
Further, we provide a Discussion section, reﬂecting on the different governance architectures, hidden similarities, and some
common trends in food waste reduction governance.
The paper identiﬁes important similarities across cases that
are often categorized as divergent in approaches (France and England, as well as Norway and Italy). At the same time, we note some
general tendencies in food waste governance, including legislative threats, challenges in distributing responsibility across the
actors, focus on “low hanging fruits”, and an overall harmonization of responses in a neoliberal paradigm, with redistribution
often pursued as a panacea for the food waste crisis.

2. Theory and Method
2.1. Governing Food Waste: Steering Modes and Actor
Constellations
Capturing the variety of responses to the food waste problem and
regulatory measures adopted as attempts to reach the SDG target
requires a framework that goes beyond the legislation/no legislation dichotomy. For this, we draw on governance scholarship.
Governance is a “way of organizing collective action”,[16] by
means of mobilizing various actors and organizing their eﬀective
interaction, creating the conditions for taking binding decisions,
and expanding the set of actors involved in decision-making to
increase not only eﬀectiveness but also legitimacy. The result is
“a system of co-production of norms and public goods where the
co-producers are diﬀerent kinds of actors”.[17] Consequently, we

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (2 of 11)

can distinguish speciﬁc governance architectures, that is the structures, processes, and mechanisms that guide decision-making,
accountability, and control within an organization or system.[18]
What is important for our analysis is the way governance
theory approaches the frontier between the public and private
sectors.[19] The move beyond traditional top-down and centralized steering logically spawns a “hybridization of modes of control that allow the production of fragmented and multidimensional order within the state, by the state, without the state, and
beyond the state”.[20] Governance scholarship looks at how states
lose the capacity for direct control, replacing it with a capacity
to inﬂuence actors’ behaviour by using a number of less direct
forms of intervention.[21,22]
Strict distinctions between state and non-state governing are
rare and diﬃcult, as states delegate power and such delegation
can have many forms, from specialist governmental agencies to
ceding competences and resources to local governments. It can
also mean engaging with other actors, as well as with public and
private entities exchanging and blending resources.[21]
Food waste could seem like a straightforward problem, with
relatively stable value chains and concurring, identiﬁable market
failures. Many causes are very tangible and depend on unforeseen weather shocks, costs related to reducing food waste (at several food chain stages), pricing of external eﬀects related to food
waste or good information access. Moreover, there is a universal agreement among actors that wasting food is wrong (morally,
economically, and environmentally). A closer look, however, reveals a more “wicked” problem as a range of diﬀerent actors,
and institutions with diverse underlying perspectives drive food
waste prevention and reduction tools.[23] More ambitious reductions are therefore increasingly perceived as a wicked problem
with increased scope and complexity requiring new governance
approaches.
In a highly complex society with problems extending across
scales and/or borders, central actors—governments—are often
unable to obtain the knowledge required to form eﬀective instruments of intervention, making centralized and hierarchical
steering extremely diﬃcult or downright impossible. Public actors are “unable to muster the knowledge required to shape
eﬀective instruments of intervention” and need to depend on
broader expertise and knowledge[24] but also on implementation
and enforcement.[25] Thus, many governments encourage other
actors to address environmental problems voluntarily.[26–28] Selfgoverning capacity of decentralized actors is mostly welcome in
complex and wicked problems,[29] where it is diﬃcult to agree on
means, deﬁnitions, and evaluation frameworks.[30] We can distinguish three potential drivers of self-regulation: where industrial actors try to prevent governmental intervention with selfregulatory actions to forestall the legislative threat, where social
pressures and anticipated consumer behavior push for certain
corporate behavior or from the company’s own values and motivation that something must be done.[9,31–33]
Preventing food waste brings public and private sectors together to transfer ideas and develop innovative solutions.[34]
However, self-governing spaces are not automatically eﬀective
and eﬃcient, and they also create accountability problems.[35]
Public meta-governance should strike the right balance between
over-regulation and under-regulation of self-governing actors.
The ﬁrst diminishes motivation, and reduces ownership feeling

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

Figure 1. Governance architecture typology (authors’ own elaboration adapted from Hall 2011).

and creativity. The second might lead to avoiding conﬂicts, promoting the status quo or the lowest common denominator.[36]

2.2. Conceptual Framework, Methodology and Data
Non-legislative responses to food waste constitute a heterogenous category, and on the other hand, food waste laws can be
constructed in very diﬀerent ways and engage key actors in the
sector and along food value chains, a variety which has to be categorized more accurately to enable learning across cases and overall, increase the chances to meet the SDG target.
Understanding that contemporary public policy and responses
to wicked problems such as food waste cannot be reduced to
the distinction between direct state response (in the form of
legislation) or lack thereof, we propose a two-dimensional matrix
of governance architectures. We identify two dimensions with
actors across the public and private spectrum and steering
modes with more hierarchical or non-hierarchical regimes
(see Figure 1).
Those two dimensions have been elaborated by Hall,[37] in order to demonstrate and better understand the variety of governance architectures, initially applied to study tourism policies.
The resulting four ideal-typical constellations contain elements
widely applied in governance studies. Hierarchies, markets, and
networks have been presented as three typical modes of coordination already by Frances et al.,[38] while Pierre and Peters[39] added
the fourth category of community.
Each ideal type has some inherent characteristics and promotes diﬀerent policy instruments. Hierarchies strongly distinguish between the public and private policy space, use command
and control and hierarchical relationships. Policymakers, legislators, and central government are key actors. Markets see
market mechanisms as eﬃcient and just regulation and assume
consumers as rational actors can make good decisions, based
primarily on price signals. Here bargaining takes place between

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (3 of 11)

producers and consumers and the policy arena is dominated by
economic actors who can take the lead and engage in voluntary
norm-setting if that is consistent with their interests. Networks,
on the other hand, facilitate coordination between public and
private actors, bring more policy bargaining and negotiations
with diﬀerent stakeholder groups, with public actors in the lead.
Finally, Communities bring more civic spirit into governance
processes and a “grassroots” scale, where communities govern
with minimal state involvement, in a bottom-up and largely
voluntary manner.
We apply this conceptual framework to a comparative analysis of four country case studies. Our case selection is driven by
the regulatory context and national engagement in food waste
work and represents the frontrunners in top-down food waste
reduction governance (Italy and France with the ﬁrst European
food waste laws) and bottom-up approaches to food waste governance (the United Kingdom, UK, more speciﬁcally England,[40]
and Norway with most established voluntary agreements on food
waste). All case study countries are internationally perceived as
leaders in food waste interventions,[5,9,14] even before the issue
has been oﬃcially addressed by the SDG and European Union
(EU) policy agendas.
For each case, we provide (i) a brief historical sketch of the evolution of food waste governance, followed by the two-dimensional
analysis, where (ii) steering modes discuss to what extent the hierarchies and hierarchical relationships and arrangements are discernable and (iii) to analyze actors’ constellations we map key actors
involved in food waste reduction work. In the last category (iv) focus areas of food waste governance architecture are discussed. Casestudy analysis draws on the relevant primary food waste law and
policy documents analysis, a desktop review of academic scholarship, and grey literature, together with data gathered from the
“Building REsponsibility And Developing Innovative Strategies
For Tackling Food Waste” (BREAD) project, which included background interviews with food waste experts and stakeholder workshops.

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

3. Analysis
3.1. France
3.1.1. Historical Development
France has had an active tax policy encouraging food donations
since the 1980s. Tax incentives started with food businesses but
were later extended to farmers, processors, and logistic operators.
The 2013 National Pact against Food Waste[41,42] was followed by
two major laws: the Garot Law from 2016 and the Egalim Law
from 2018. The former is known as the ﬁrst European law on food
waste and notable for obligating certain retailers (supermarkets
of more than 400m2 ) to sign agreements with food redistribution
charities to donate surplus food and prohibiting the deliberate destruction of food still ﬁt for human consumption. Further legal
measures from 2018 and 2020 require the food industry to measure the amount of food they waste.[42]

3.1.2. Steering Modes
France is often presented as illustrating a hierarchical or “topdown” governance approach, exempliﬁed by the ongoing and extensive use of legislation and regulation. The Garot Law is sometimes described as the world’s ﬁrst “punitive” food waste law[43]
to adopt formally strong and binding language.[42] “Command
and control” style regulation is deployed, with possible sanctions
for non-compliance with obligations such as those to enter into
donation agreements, oﬀer doggy bags and improve donations,
together with a ban on the deliberate destruction of surplus food.
However, while widely reported as banning supermarket
food waste[44] and implementing a “mandatory donation”
requirement,[45] there is no requirement to donate any minimum
quantities/proportions of food (in contrast to a similar approach
adopted in California); sanctions have as yet been levied; and
there is no capacity in any case for monitoring compliance.[42,46]
The Garot Law thus promotes the social expectation of donating
food, rather than requiring it,[41] adopting a “suasive” approach
relying on “symbolic messaging and voluntary engagement”.[42]
Furthermore, the (not-so-mandatory) donation obligation may be
less signiﬁcant for donations than relatively high tax incentives
(60% capped at 0.05% of annual turnover), without which supermarkets would likely send surplus to anaerobic digestion.[41,47,48]
A reliance on pricing mechanisms is more typically associated
with hierarchy through markets, with the below analysis of actor
constellations further demonstrating how the French approach
is somewhat mischaracterized in the literature as the “top-down”
exemplar.

agrifood, retail, and food service sectors.[42,45] Notably however,
the outcome of these multistakeholder processes was state intervention.
That said, France falls between diﬀerent governance approaches. By “increasing the capacity of the market”, the Garot
Law provides a policy arena for private economic actors to tackle
food waste through a more market-oriented approach. For example, the Garot Law “transformed” surplus food into a resource
and thus created business opportunities for a new category of private actors: new for-proﬁt start-ups which are increasingly inhabiting a sector previously populated by non-proﬁt charities.[49] Furthermore, while state regulation of food waste is typically associated with a focus on the public or common good, the French approach has actually institutionalized a narrative “that prioritizes
proﬁt over social equity”.[50] Moreover, a variety of campaigns
have sought to place responsibility on consumers for food waste
(rather than broader structures),[42] further emphasising the role
of market actors.
Furthermore, France appears to target sectors of the supply
chain individually. The Garot Law initially targeted retailers,[51]
or more speciﬁcally, retail-level food waste, which may be somewhat misplaced given the relatively small quantities produced at
this stage.[52] While these obligations have since been extended
to caterers, food businesses and wholesale traders, this approach
represents a relatively narrow understanding of retail responsibility for food waste, given supermarkets are indirectly responsible
for food waste that arises elsewhere in the supply chain, through,
e.g., purchasing agreements (upstream) or marketing campaigns
(downstream).[47,53] The Garot Law instead puts responsibilities on retailers only for the waste they generate in retail. Notably, retailers dominated the pre-legislative policy discussion and
blocked potentially more transformative intervention.[42]

3.1.4. Focus Areas of Food Waste Governance Architecture
The French approach primarily targets the re-use/redistribution
of surplus food. It has thus been widely criticized as treating
the symptoms rather than root causes of food waste,[42,49,52,54,55]
and potentially exacerbating challenges relating to overproduction by perpetuating a norm of abundance while incentivizing
retailers to shift food waste elsewhere in the supply chain.[42,56,57]
Approaches that ensure retailer responsibility for food waste implies the need for holistic interventions that prioritize “strong”
prevention at all stages of the supply chain and address power
imbalances in the supply chain.[54,58] However, despite the recent EU Directive on unfair trading practices (UTPs – practices
that grossly deviate from good commercial conduct)[59] and alternatives to retailer-driven food systems, French policies such as
mandatory measurement have started to support such alternatives in only marginal ways.[42]

3.1.3. Key Actors
The extensive use of law and regulation places the state at the center of food waste governance in France. However, collaborative,
multi-stakeholder workshops alongside a variety of grassroots activities have also played a signiﬁcant role, with a variety of actors, including environmental non-proﬁts, consumer organizations, food assistance organizations, and representatives of the

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (4 of 11)

3.2. Italy
3.2.1. Historical Development
Coordinated action against food waste in Italy started with the
Good Samaritan Law, passed in 2003. It encouraged restaurant

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

owners to donate uneaten food and debureaucratized food donations, simplifying procedures for non-proﬁt organizations working on food redistribution. In 2011 the “Zero Waste Charter” was
established, an agreement signed by 800 Italian municipalities
to implement active policies aimed at reducing food waste at the
local and municipal level.[60] In 2013, the Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea launched
the National Waste Prevention Program opening the door to the
ﬁrst national Food Loss and Waste Prevention Plan, also known
as PINPAS, published in 2014. The plan highlights ten priority
measures to reduce food waste at diﬀerent level of the food supply chain, with a special emphasis on surplus donations.[61]
Finally, with the Gadda Law from 2016, Italy became the second European country after France to implement a legislative system to address the problem of food loss and waste. Through its 18
articles, it regulates diﬀerent areas of application to reduce food
waste, favoring the transformation and redistribution of food surpluses along the entire food supply chain, implementing policies to promote the reuse and recycling of food waste, and supporting research, information, and awareness-raising activities.
It created the National Table for Combating Food Waste, a coordination group in charge of presenting policy proposals, supervising monitoring and evaluation activities, and improving practices. The new measures had a quick eﬀect of increased food donations by 30% in the following year.

Gadda Law simpliﬁes the donation procedure to boost the number of donors,[68] thereby primarily involving food industry and
supply chain agreements. Furthermore, municipalities have also
been given an important role. They have the authority to give a local waste tax reduction incentive to retailers that donate, and they
oversee encouraging the use of doggy bags in restaurants. Finally,
given the focus on awareness-raising campaigns to encourage the
prevention of food waste, consumers are also central.

3.2.4. Focus Areas of Food Waste Governance Architecture
While Italy is the exemplar of the top-down legislative approach
to food waste, the resulting governance arrangement is creating
food waste reduction networks engaging a large variety of actors.
It can be observed that food donation is a key issue in the food
waste prevention governance, with procedural, ﬁscal, and sanitary measures that encourage food donations.
At the national level, since the Gadda Law aims at encouraging
the donation and redistribution of food surpluses, the Italian food
waste governance focuses on “weak” waste prevention and reuse
of products, with a speciﬁc focus on redistribution.[69] Regional
action and most of the initiatives at the local and city level are also
mostly targeting food redistribution.[69]

3.3. England
3.2.2. Steering Modes
3.3.1. Historical Development
Although its approach is considered as a top-down one, the
Gadda Law does not include mandatory obligations or punitive
sanctions, but it is rooted in voluntary agreements that involve
diﬀerent stakeholders. A similar approach is also used at the Italian regional level, where most regions have committed to adopting their own legislation with a focus on promoting food surplus
distribution and reducing food waste.[62] At a local level, cities
have proven to be key actors in preventing food waste as a result of
successful policies and initiatives to combat it.[63] By acting on an
urban scale, cities can combine the regulatory approach with the
administrative one, adopting multi-level and multi-sector policies. Indeed, the prevention of food waste requires a variety of
initiatives that involve various local public authorities, such as
cities, provinces, and other actors including citizens, school canteens, non-governmental organizations, retailers, food markets,
and restaurants.[64–67]
An example of urban food policy adopted in Italy is the international Milan Urban Food Policy Pact, an agreement signed by
160 cities around the world that binds the authorities of the cities
to collaborate to create sustainable food systems, ensure that everyone has access to nutritious meals, protect biodiversity, and
combat food loss and waste.

3.2.3. Key actors
Concerning the public and private actors involved, the Gadda Law
mainly targets authorities, food industry, end consumers, and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Indeed, by ﬁlling up
some of the holes left by the previous “Good Samaritan” law, the

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (5 of 11)

Food waste emerged as a policy issue in 2000 and has since
worked its way up the agenda.[56] 2005 saw the signing of the
Courtauld Commitment, the world’s ﬁrst voluntary agreement
to tackle food waste. Later in 2007, government identiﬁed food
waste as a “priority waste stream”,[70] and the ﬁrst “large-scale”
interventions to tackle food waste commenced, centered around
the “Love Food Hate Waste” campaign.[71] Courtauld has since
expanded in scope, and now provides a series of non-binding targets aligned with SDG 12.3, alongside the Food Waste Reduction
Roadmap’s “Target Measure Act” approach.[72] In 2018, the Government also proposed several hierarchical measures, including
mandatory reporting and reduction targets.[58] However, at the
time of writing, these are yet to be implemented, and it remains
to be seen whether England will move away from the markets
approach outlined below.

3.3.2. Steering Modes
England represents a hierarchical approach to food waste
governance through markets rather than state intervention.
Bradshaw[58] demonstrates how government “stepped back”
from food waste, with regulation as a last resort “hollowing out”
the governance space,[58] see also.[73] Instead, government argued
that a more sustainable economy “can and should be delivered
with limited government intervention as industry responds to the
clear business case” for waste prevention.[74]
Market approaches typically involve the privatization/corporatization of state functions and the use of voluntary

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

instruments. In England, this is most obviously illustrated by
outsourcing the administration of voluntary eﬀorts to the Waste
and Resources Action Programme (WRAP).[58] Another example
is the increasing reliance on third sector/charitable organizations to redistribute surplus food, in turn shifting burdens for
preventing waste away from the state.[58,75] WRAP has relied in
Courtauld on creating a “pre-competitive” space to support collaboration between private actors, suggesting an aspiration of a
non-hierarchical network approach. However, evidence suggests
that competition has “crept in” to these spaces, undermining
collaboration and highlighting the overall dominance of the
market.[76,77]

campaigns,[56,85] the state is more interventionist with respect
to waste management activities such as treatment and disposal. Nonetheless, this is done in a manner consistent with
the markets approach, with pricing mechanisms—such as a
landﬁll tax and subsidies for anaerobic digestion (turning food
waste in to biofuels)—supporting landﬁll diversion.[70,86] Evidence suggests these incentives hamper surplus food redistribution eﬀorts.[87–89] While levels of surplus food redistribution
have increased through grant funding to the third sector,[90]
measures more explicitly tackling overproduction are yet to
materialize.[58,91]

3.4. Norway
3.3.3. Key Actors
3.4.1. Historical Development
Market approaches typically emphasize private business actors, as
well as consumers, with the state playing a secondary overseeing
role. In the UK however, the most signiﬁcant actor is arguably
WRAP. WRAP was established by government as a not-for-proﬁt
company to promote sustainable resource use, and it was later
registered as a charity.[56,78] It is WRAP, not a government department or regulator, that administers the Courtauld Commitments
and undertakes several associated quasi-regulatory/state activities. These include convening working groups, producing written
guidance, and distributing public funding. WRAP is widely regarded as “instrumental” in raising the proﬁle of food waste,[56,76]
with “unanimity” as to the critical role WRAP has played as a
trusted and neutral intermediary.[79,80]
This approach does nonetheless emphasize the role of private actors (rather than the state) in preventing food waste
via the “business case”, with clear hallmarks of a markets approach. For example, a central strand of WRAP’s activity is working with major retailers to prevent food waste in households,
where much food is wasted.[71] This reﬂects government policy seeking to enroll retailers as “surrogate regulators” of food
waste,[70] see, e.g.,[81] with retailers expected (but not required)
to take the lead in preventing food waste upstream in the supply chain, supported by a range of guides and processes provided
by WRAP.[72,76] While levels of retail waste are relatively low,[56]
government policy increasingly encourages third sector organizations to redistribute this surplus, and in a markets fashion, instructs civil society organizations to “think like a business” (i.e.,
that non-proﬁt organizations should act according to a market
logic).[74]
Seeking to mobilize consumer behavior around household
food waste prevention has also been central. However, the construction of food waste as an “end-of-pipe” consumer problem
has been criticized as disproportionately “blaming” individuals
for a structural problem while also distracting from the need to
prevent waste upstream,[82–84] particularly on farms.[58,56]

3.3.4. Focus Areas of Food Waste Governance Architecture
While England is the exemplar of the voluntary approach to
food waste prevention, with considerable energy diverted to
surplus food redistribution together with preventing household food waste through soft initiatives such as information

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (6 of 11)

Food waste became a policy issue in Norway after 2008, when the
food-retailing sector identiﬁed it as a pressing problem.[10] However, prior to 2010, when the ForMat project, the ﬁrst systematic
attempt to tackle food waste, was launched, no national statistics on food waste existed.[9,92] Since 2012, ForMat was administered by Matvett AS, a non-proﬁt multi-stakeholder hub, working
with the business sector, ﬁve ministries, and the research institute NORSUS (previously known as Østfoldforskning). In 2015,
food sector companies signed an Agreement of Intent to reduce
food waste,[93] followed by the Industry Agreement on the reduction of food waste signed in 2017 by a dozen industry organizations and several ministries.[94] At the time of writing, just over
100 companies have joined the voluntary agreement. NGOs have
also been increasingly active in shaping food waste governance.
The organization Future in our Hands started launching educational campaigns and pressing for increased industry ambition in
2012. Another NGO, Food Banks Norway, started working on surplus food redistribution.[9] Companies can request value added
tax refunds for donated food products, but the same rule also applies to all discarded food.

3.4.2. Steering Modes
Current food waste governance in Norway is non-hierarchical,
which is very much in line with Norway’s public policy traditions
that see a strong commitment to subsidiarity, decentralized decision making, local governance, and a strong collaboration between civil society, private business and labor organizations, with
state institutions in an auxiliary role.[95]
The examples of France and Italy opened the space for policy
learning. As of mid-2024, there are no penalties for not meeting the targets and the Industry Agreement can be terminated
with one month’s notice. Some companies struggle to reach the
Agreement’s targets, while others met them long before or introduced their own thresholds. For almost ten years the “shadow
of hierarchy”, that is the looming threat of governmental regulation, was cast over the Norwegian food waste governance. It was
anticipated that, if the Industry Agreement does not deliver or
appears to focus only on low hanging fruit, the state will likely
step in with mandated self-regulation or direct regulation.[9] If,
on the contrary, the Agreement proved a success, the government

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

might scale up the Agreement’s provisions to cover the entire industry. Following the September 2021 general election, the incoming Labor-Centre government announced its dedication to
a Food Waste Law.[96] Finally in early 2023 a special committee
got the mandate to ﬁnd measures that can halve food waste. The
committee did not recommend one particular food waste law, but
pointed to 35 measures, where some could constitute food waste
legislation.[97]
3.4.3. Key Actors
Norway’s approach stands out due to the centrality of the food industry, i.e., the current food waste reduction governance framework, built around the Industry Agreement, relies on private
actors.[10] Public actors are, however, becoming increasingly active.
At this stage, industry is still the main driver of the process and
controls self-regulation, but outside pressure underlines expectations of particular outcomes for this voluntary process. Here,
a central role of Matvett AS can be observed in its role of a
secretariat of the special committee. However, the committee is
broadly composed of representatives from the food value chain,
the municipal sector, consumer, and environmental organizations as well as research environments.
State agencies are taking over some food waste reduction
tasks, including a system for industry reporting, building national statistics, reporting to the EU, producing reports, inﬂuencing consumer behavior, supporting donation, and involving
other public sector actors.[94] At the same time, the state has been
withdrawing ﬁnancial support for industrial food waste reduction
work and seemingly sees this as the burden for the industry.
3.4.4. Focus Areas of Food Waste Governance Architecture
The Industry Agreement lists eighteen measures that need to be
undertaken by industry and authorities. Signiﬁcant emphasis is
put on data gathering and coordination so most of the measures
listed cannot be classiﬁed according to the level of intervention.
It can be noted that the agreement shows some general directions of food waste reduction work and responsibilities. It can
therefore give actors ﬂexibility in shaping reduction measures,
but can also easily hamper ambition and promote inaction. The
measures listed are rarely concrete. Several are dedicated to prevention, re-use, and recovery and they imply collaboration (food
industry and authorities, food industry and NGOs, authorities
and consumers, authorities, food industry and NGOs). Interestingly, prevention is listed in the consumer context, while there is
an emphasis on re-use and donations for the industry. In practice, the industry elaborated its own pyramid where preference
is given to selling at full price, followed by discount selling and
donation.[92] More ambitious measures dedicated to “strong prevention” by tackling overproduction, food waste on farms, or systemic failures are still lacking and the new recommendations
largely rely on voluntarism. They suggest among others that the
Industry Agreement needs to be strengthened and expanded and
businesses should carry out risk assessments and implement tailored measures to avoid food waste in their own business and
across the value chain, including toward the consumer.

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (7 of 11)

4. Discussion
By exploring the case studies focusing on two dimensions of governance architectures (steering modes and actors), we reveal both
distinguishing features and similarities that in turn challenge assumptions around food waste reduction governance. Our analysis shows that the typical one-dimensional distinction between
“state driven” on the one hand, and “voluntary” approaches to
food waste governance on the other, can be challenged.
Contrary to the law versus no law distinction, which would
see France and Italy in one category, we ﬁnd that Italy and Norway have adopted less hierarchical governance approaches than
France and England (see Figure 2). However, while the French
and English approaches to food waste are typically presented as
diametrically opposed (legislative v. voluntary), our analysis reveals this as a false dichotomy. For example, France’s legislative
“top-down” approach bears hallmarks of markets more obviously
associated with England’s voluntary “business case” approach.
While France has adopted a circular economy approach to redistribution, reconﬁguring the sector to attract private parties,
England has oﬀered funding directly to third sector charities.
However, the French approach appears to have some diﬀerent
focus areas, with tax incentives applying to food donation. This
contrasts with England’s marketized approach to waste management through subsidies for anaerobic digestion that in turn have
harmed redistribution. While the circular economy approach in
England has been criticized as promoting a narrative of “the more
waste, the better”,[87,98] for the reasons given above, the French
approach might be criticized for promoting “the more surplus,
the better” (Table 1).
An analysis of actors is also revealing. England for example has
“outsourced” food waste administration to WRAP, in receipt of
signiﬁcant (though dwindling) public funding that in turn provides ﬁnancial support to third sector redistribution organizations. WRAP provides a quasi-public institutional presence that
does not appear to be mirrored in France or Italy, where a clearer
role for public actors might be expected. Interestingly in Italy, it
is the cities (i.e., municipal level authorities) that show the ambition to become food waste governance hubs (e.g., Milan).[63]
However, WRAP is under-conceptualized and underresearched, both from a governance perspective and as a
food waste intervention in and of itself. A comparison between
WRAP in the UK and Matvett in Norway is also instructive of
further research that might be carried out in this area, raising
related questions around accountability and legitimacy. Both
Matvett and WRAP were fundamental in opening the public
debate on food waste and are national “hubs” of expertise and
inﬂuence. However, they are both potentially constrained by
their funding settlements. Most of WRAP’s income is from
UK governments[78,90] and is potentially limited in its ability to
engage in a robust public dialogue with government about food
waste policy. Matvett in turn may be limited in growing further
and in its ability to question levels of industry ambition given it
is heavily reliant on the Norwegian food industry for funding.
While there is emphasis on retailers in France, England, and
Norway, the construction of retailer responsibility for food waste
appears to diﬀer. For example, under the French Garot Law, the
responsibility of retailers is primarily for food waste within their
own operations. In contrast, retailers in the UK are increasingly

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

Figure 2. Country cases, governance approaches, and key policy documents (own elaboration).

mobilized as surrogate regulators of waste elsewhere in the supply chain, and in Norway, some retailers are also starting to raise
consumer awareness on food waste. While the ability of retailers to drive meaningful change in the absence of legislative measures has been doubted,[58,88,99,100] this broader conceptualisation
of their role in food waste prevention is more in-keeping with
calls for distributing responsibility for food waste along the supply chain.[80]
At the same time, while household waste levels have understandably driven an interest in changing consumer behavior,
there is limited activity across all four cases to tackle “strong” pre-

vention with problems related to overproduction, including on
farms or general product abundance. Arguably, this relates to the
structural limitations of housing food waste law and policy within
frameworks on waste, as opposed to food and agriculture,[87]
conﬁrming Messner’s “prevention paradox” that describes a proclaimed focus on preventing and a working focus on managing
food waste.[101]
Emphasis is increasingly placed, particularly in the grey literature, on legislative support for food redistribution, especially
“Good Samaritan” Laws and tax incentives.[102] The Norwegian
case shows that even when the state oﬀers tax exemptions for

Table 1. Food waste governance architectures: Summary of comparative case study analysis.
Binding law

France

England

Norway

Italy

Yes

No

No

Yes

Key elements of food waste
reduction policy

Extensive use of food waste
legislation and regulation

Outsourcing the
administration of voluntary
eﬀorts to WRAP

Steering modes

Hierarchies – a “hard”
legislative approach via the
state

Clear privatization of
governance and hierarchy
through markets

Non-hierarchical communities
emerging around
self-regulation initiatives

Non-hierarchical public-private
networks across scales, with
strong involvement of
municipal authorities

Key actors

State actors, market actors, big
initial emphasis on retailers

WRAP through the Courtauld
Commitments

Matvett AS and food industry
companies, ministries,
NGOs

National authorities, industry,
NGOs, important role of
municipal authorities

Focus of governance
architecture

re-use/ redistribution of
surplus food

surplus food redistribution
together with preventing
household food waste
through soft initiatives

work with the food industry,
support for food
redistribution

special emphasis on surplus
donations

General trends

legislative turn (laws and legislative “threats”)
focus on “low hanging fruits”,
a neoliberal paradigm (large emphasis on redistribution and new business models)

Industry Agreement on the
reduction of food waste

Hierarchical

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (8 of 11)

National Food Loss and Waste
Prevention Plan, PINPAS,
National Table for
Combating Food Waste,
laws for food donation

Non-hierarchical

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

donated food, the systemic approach fails, as the same scheme
is used for food thrown away, treating food waste prevention and
food waste management equally. While Italy’s Good Samaritan
Law has been held up an example of best practice,[103] seeking to
encourage for-proﬁt private actors to donate surplus food through
liability protections (see, e.g.,[104,105] ) and publicly-funded tax
breaks[52,106] is not uncontroversial. Similarly, while the EU
(and England and Norway) shift toward legal obligations to
measure and report on food waste, it should be remembered that
measurement itself is no guarantee of preventative actions.[107]

Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

5. Conclusion
Since the governance of food waste is a relatively new ﬁeld for
policymakers, policy implementation and data availability for
national contexts is, comparatively in size and scope, severely
limited.[5] Our analysis of four leading food waste jurisdictions—
France, England, Norway, and Italy—unpacks the hidden realities
obscured by the simplistic division of legislative versus voluntary
approaches. For example, while France is typically presented as
the archetypically legislative food waste regime, it has many markets governance features, and Italy’s legislative interventions are
rooted in non-hierarchal voluntarism.
While we were to some extent able to place the case studies
within the governance approaches matrix based on Hall 2011,[37]
which adds nuance to the way emergent food waste reduction
governance architectures can be categorized and divided (see
Figure 2), there are also several uniting general tendencies visible in all studied cases.[108]
First, there is some evidence of a “legislative turn”. For example, in the hitherto “non-intervention” approaches of England
and Norway, policy discussions underway imply a greater role for
the state. It is also worth noting that many of the French policy
initiatives aimed at providing guidelines and incentives were initially classiﬁed as voluntary but later mandated. It can also be
noted that the legislative threat is a powerful governance tool for
mobilizing the actors in more ambitious food waste prevention
and food waste laws may be very diverse in their scope, emphasis
and execution. Food waste governance should be seen as an experimentalist policy arena practiced at the national level, and inherently linked to local food production, climate, lifestyles, food
habits and norms.[10]
Second, we note that food waste prevention work starts with
picking “low hanging fruits”. Quick eﬀects were initially seen
with relatively simple interventions targeting both business actors and consumers. As the ambition (and costs) of food waste
prevention begin to bite in the run up to SDG 12.3 deadline,
more conﬂicts emerge, particularly given concerns that powerful
actors, especially retailers, have been central in shaping the limited obligations in France[42] and England.[58] Policymakers need
to show more strength enforcing policies against the interests of
powerful agents if food waste reduction targets are to be achieved.
Finally, an overall harmonization of responses and convergence in a “neoliberal” paradigm, with redistribution and emphasis on business innovation and ﬁnding new proﬁt-generating
activities often pursued as a panacea for the food waste crisis, is
highly visible in all studied cases. We note that even community
organizations in food waste redistribution start to indirectly contribute to the neoliberal governance model.[109]

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

While vested economic interests may present a barrier to the
passing of eﬀective laws, care should also be taken to design legislation that tackles the root causes (rather than symptoms) of food
waste, including overproduction. This highlights the ongoing European priority for mandatory food waste measurement from
farm-to-fork alongside legislation that targets prevention within
the broader context of the food system.

2300265 (9 of 11)

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created
or analyzed in this study.

Keywords
food waste governance, food waste law, reduction targets, SDG, voluntary
agreements
Received: September 4, 2023
Revised: June 4, 2024
Published online: August 8, 2024

[1] V. S. M. Magalhães, L. M. D. F. Ferreira, C. Silva, Sustainable Production and Consumption 2021, 28, 1580.
[2] SDG. 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030.
Agenda for sustainable development 2015
[3] European Commission, About Food Waste 2024
[4] E. Papargyropoulou, R. Lozano, J. K. Steinberger, N. Wright, J.
Cleaner Prod. 2014, 76, 106.
[5] T. Gumbert, T. Gumbert, in Responsibility in Environmental Governance: Unwrapping the Global Food Waste Dilemma, Springer International Publishing, Berlin 2022, 119.
[6] B. Garske, K. Heyl, F. Ekardt, L. M. Weber, W. Gradzka, Land 2020,
9, 231.
[7] M. Eriksson, C. Malefors, P. Callewaert, H. Hartikainen, O.
Pietiläinen, I. Strid, Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 2019, 4,
100021.
[8] Feedback EU, Why the EU needs to adopt ambitious legally binding
food waste reduction targets 2022.
[9] J. Szulecka, N. Strøm-Andersen, Scandinavian Political Studies 2022,
45, 86.
[10] J. Szulecka, N. Strøm-Andersen, L. Scordato, E. Skrivervik, in From
Waste to Value Valorisation Pathways for Organic Waste Streams in
Circular Bioeconomies (Eds: A. Klitkou, A. M. Fevolden, M. Capasso),
Routledge, London 2019
[11] E. Bryant, France battles food waste by way of law, https://www.dw.
com/en/france-battles-food-waste-by-law/a-19148931 (accessed:
April 2016)
[12] R. Casey, France’s war on waste makes it the world’s most sustainable country, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/12/franceswar-on-waste-makes-it-most-food-sustainable-country/
(accessed: December 2017)
[13] M. Roy, Food waste in Italy to be slashed by revolutionary
new law, https://www.newfoodmagazine.com/news/26045/foodwaste-italy-law-fao/ (accessed: August 2016)

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

[14] L. G. Vaqué, European Food and Feed Law Review 2017, 12, 224.
[15] Refresh Policy Working Group, Voluntary Agreements as
a policy instrument for food waste reduction, https://eurefresh.org/sites/default/ﬁles/MINUTES_REFRESH-PolicyWorking-Group-on-VAs.pdf (accessed: June 2018)
[16] E. H. Klijn, A. Van Buuren, J. Edelenbos, in The Oxford Handbook of
Governance (Ed: D. Levi-Faur), Oxford University Press, New York,
2012, p. 294.
[17] S. Bartolini, in New Modes of Governance in Europe: Governing in the
Shadow of Hierarchy (Eds: A. Héritier, M. Rhodes), Palgrave Macmillan UK, London 2011, p. 1.
[18] F. Biermann, P. Pattberg, H. van Asselt, F. Zelli, Global Environmental
Politics 2009, 9, 14.
[19] J. Tosun, E. L. Saad, J. Glückler, A. Irigoyen Rios, R. Lehmann, Global
Challenges 2023, 7, 2300012.
[20] D. Levi-Faur, in The Oxford Handbook of Governance, Oxford University Press, New York 2012.
[21] B. G. Peters, P. J. G. W. Government?, Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory 1998, 8, 223.
[22] M. Asaduzzaman, P. Virtanen, in Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance (Ed: A. Farazmand), Springer International Publishing, Berlin, 2018, pp. 2907–
2919.
[23] E. Närvänen, N. Mesiranta, M. Mattila, A. Heikkinen, Food Waste
Management: Solving the Wicked Problem 2020.
[24] J. Richardson, The Oxford Handbook of Governance (Ed: D. LeviFaur), Oxford University Press, New York 2012, pp. 311.
[25] A. Héritier, S. Eckert, Journal of Public Policy 2008, 28, 113.
[26] T. A. Börzel, in New Modes of Governance in Europe: Governing in the
Shadow of Hierarchy (Ed: A. Héritier, M. Rhodes), Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 2011, pp. 75–103.
[27] A. Héritier, D. Lehmkuhl, in New Modes of Governance in Europe:
Governing in the Shadow of Hierarchy (Eds: A. Héritier, M. Rhodes),
Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 2011, pp. 48–74.
[28] J. van der Heijden, Environmental Politics 2012, 21, 486.
[29] T. Bernauer, L. M. Schaﬀer, in The Oxford Handbook of Governance
(Ed: D. Levi-Faur), Oxford University Press, Oxford 2012.
[30] H. W. J. Rittel, M. M. Webber, Policy Sciences 1973, 4, 155.
[31] B. G. King, Administrative Science Quarterly 2008, 53, 395.
[32] J. G. March, J. P. Olsen, in The Oxford Handbook of Political Science
(Ed: R. E. Goodin), Oxford University Press, Oxford 2011.
[33] J. Maxwell, T. Lyon, S. Hackett, Journal of Law & Economics 2000, 43,
583.
[34] H. A. Nissen, M. R. Evald, A. H. Clarke, Industrial Marketing Management 2014, 43, 473.
[35] J. E. Klausen, M. Winsvold, Journal of Public Policy 2021, 41, 161.
[36] E. Sørensen, The Oxford Handbook of Governance (Ed: D. Levi-Faur),
Oxford University Press, New York 2012.
[37] C. M. Hall, Journal of Sustainable Tourism 2011, 19, 437.
[38] J. Frances, R. Levačić, J. Mitchell, G. Thomson, Markets, Hierarchies
and Networks: The Coordination of Social Life, Sage Publications, London 1991.
[39] J. Pierre, B. G. Peters, Governance, politics and the state, Bloomsbury
Publishing, New York 2020.
[40] There are divergent approaches to food waste in the other devolved
UK nations.
[41] M. Mourad, S. Finn, Opinion | France’s Ban on Food Waste Three
Years Later 2019
[42] M. Mourad, in Food Loss and Waste Policy: From Theory to Practice,
1st ed. (Ed: S. Busetti, N. Pace), Routledge, New York, 2022.
[43] L. Gore-Langton, France’s food waste ban: One year on,
https://www.foodnavigator.com/Article/2017/03/24/France-sfood-waste-ban-One-year-on (accessed: October 2022).
[44] A. Chrisaﬁs, French law forbids food waste by supermarkets 2016.

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (10 of 11)

[45] L. B. Eubanks, William & Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review
2019, 43, 667.
[46] European Court of Auditors, Combating Food Waste: an opportunity for the EU to improve the resource-eﬃciency of the food supply
chain 2016.
[47] M. Mourad, J. Cleaner Prod. 2016, 126, 461.
[48] M. Tatum, How France is leading the way on food waste,
https://www.thegrocer.co.uk/food-waste/how-france-is-leadingthe-way-on-food-waste/536447.article (accessed: May 2016)
[49] S. Leipold, K. Weldner, M. Hohl, Ecological Economics 2021, 187,
107086.
[50] S. Leipold, K. Weldner, M. Hohl, Three narratives about food waste
and their social impact 2021.
[51] K. Walsh, Indiana Journal of Law and Social Equality 2018, 6, 7.
[52] C. Giordano, L. Falasconi, C. Cicatiello, B. Pancino, J. Cleaner Prod.
2019, 119617.
[53] E. Colbert, Causes of food waste in international supply chains, Rockefeller Foundation, London 2017.
[54] WWF-WRAP. Halving Food Loss and Waste in the EU by 2030: The
Major Steps Needed to Accelerate Progress 2020.
[55] B. Redlingshöfer, S. Barles, H. Weisz, Resour., Conserv. Recycl. 2020,
156, 104723.
[56] S. D. Porter, in Routledge Handbook of Food Waste, 1st ed. (Eds: C.
Reynolds, T. Soma, C. Spring, J. Lazell), Routledge, London 2020.
[57] M. V. Gooch, B. Dent, A. S. Felfel, L. Vanclief, P. Whitehead,
Food Waste: Aligning Government and Industry Within
Value
Chain
Solutions,
http://vcm-international.com/wpcontent/uploads/2016/10/Food-Waste-Aligning-Governmentand-Industry-VCMI-Oct-4-2016.pdf (accessed: October 2016).
[58] C. Bradshaw, Legal stud 2020, 40, 321.
[59] J. S. Taylor, J. Parﬁtt, D. Jarosz, Regulating the Role of Unfair Trading
Practices in Food Waste, https://eu-refresh.org/regulating-roleunfair-trading-practices-food-waste-generation.html
(accessed:
July 2024).
[60] Last Minute Market. Carta zero spreco. https://www.
lastminutemarket.it/casi-studio/campagna-spreco-zero
(accessed: July 2024).
[61] PINPAS. Piano Nazionale di Prevenzione degli Sprechi Alimentari. Le azioni prioritarie per la lotta allo spreco, https:
//www.mase.gov.it/sites/default/ﬁles/archivio_immagini/Galletti/
Comunicati/PINPAS%2010%20MISURE%20PRIORITARIE%205%
20GIUGNO%202014.pdf (accessed: July 2024).
[62] P. Azzurro, S. Gaiani, M. Vittuari, Italy – Country report on national
food waste policy, https://www.eu-fusions.org/phocadownload/
country-report/FUSIONS%20IT%20Country%20Report%2030.06.
pdf (accessed: 2016).
[63] D. Fattibene, F. Recanati, K. Dembska, M. Antonelli, Resources 2020,
9, 99.
[64] E. Dansero, D. Marino, G. Mazzocchi, Y. Nicolarea, Lo Spazio Delle
Politiche Locali del Cibo: Temi, Esperienze e Prospettive, Rete delle
Politiche Locali del Cibo, https://www.crea.gov.it/web/politichee-bioeconomia/-/lo-spazio-delle-politiche-locali-del-cibo-temiesperienze-prospettive (accessed: November 2020).
[65] D. Fattibene, “Wise Cities” in the Mediterranean? Challenges of Urban Sustainability, Barcelona, Barcelona Centre for International Affairs (CIDOB), Eckart Woertz 2018, 187.
[66] C. Giordano, L. Falasconi, M. Boschini, A. Segrè, Detecting Drivers
of Household Food Waste in Italy: Methodological Assessment
of a Diary Study, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
323396992_Detecting_drivers_of _household_food_waste_in_
Italy_methodological_assessment_of _a_diary_study
(accessed:
September 2016).
[67] L. Michelini, L. Principato, G. Iasevoli, Ecological Economics 2018,
145, 205.

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.global-challenges.com

[68] G. Berti, C. Giordano, M. Mininni, Agriculture 2021, 11, 249.
[69] L. Principato, Italian Food Waste Governance and Practice,
https://www.sv.uio.no/tik/english/research/projects/bread/
publications/bread-report-on-italian-food-waste-governance-and.html (accessed: January 2023)
[70] Defra. Waste Strategy for England 2007. Cm 7086, 2007.
[71] WRAP. Food surplus and waste in the UK – key facts,
https://wrap.org.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-10/food-%20surplusand-%20waste-in-the-%20uk-key-facts-oct-21.pdf
(accessed:
October 2021).
[72] IGD, WRAP. Target. Measure. Act, The Food Waste Reduction
Roadmap Toolkit. WRAP 2018.
[73] D. McCarthy, P. Morling, Using Regulation as a Last Resort: Assessing the Performance of Voluntary Approaches, http://ww2.rspb.org.
uk/Images/usingregulation_tcm9-408677.pdf (accessed: November 2015).
[74] H. M. Government, Prevention is better than cure: The role of waste
prevention in moving to a more resource eﬃcient economy, Crown
Copyright, London 2013.
[75] J. L. Midgley, Journal of Environmental Planning and Management
2014, 57, 1872.
[76] A. D. Pringle, Overproduction in England’s Retail Food Chain: A
Challenge for the Regulation of Food Waste Ph.D. Thesis, University
of York, UK 2021.
[77] E. Salo, Voluntary agreements for the achievement of sustainable
development goals : Dutch Green Deals and WRAP agreements,
https://jyx.jyu.ﬁ/handle/123456789/52151 (accessed: November
2016).
[78] WRAP, What we do | WRAP, https://wrap.org.uk/what-we-do (accessed: April 2022)
[79] S. Piras, L. García Herrero, S. Burgos, F. Colin, M. Gheoldus, C.
Ledoux, J. Parﬁtt, D. Jarosz, M. Vittuari, Unfair Trading Practice Regulation and Voluntary Agreements Targeting Food Waste: a policy
assessment in select EU Member States. REFRESH 2018.
[80] D. Welch, J. Swaﬃeld, D. Evans, Journal of Consumer Culture 2021,
21, 236.
[81] Waste Strategy 2000 for England and Wales – (Part 1), Department
of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, Crown Copyright,
London 2000.
[82] D. Evans, Critical Public Health, Vol. 21, Taylor and Franis, London
2011, pp. 429–440.
[83] D. Evans, Food Waste: Home Consumption, Material Culture and Everyday Life, Bloomsbury Academic, London 2014, p. 160.
[84] C. Alexander, N. Gregson, Z. Gille, in The Handbook of Food Research
(Eds: A. Murcott, W. Belasco, P. Jackson), Bloomsbury Academic,
London 2013.
[85] WRAP, The Courtauld Commitment Annual Report - Shaping a
sustainable recovery, https://wrap.org.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/202107/WRAP-Courtauld-Commitment-Annual-Report-2021.pdf (accessed: July 2021).

Global Challenges. 2024, 8, 2300265

2300265 (11 of 11)

[86] Anaerobic Digestion Strategy and Action Plan, Crown Copyright, London 2011.
[87] C. Bradshaw, J Environmental Law 2018, 30, 311.
[88] J. Swaﬃeld, D. Evans, D. Welch, Geoforum 2018, 89, 43.
[89] S. T. Karki, A. C. T. Bennett, J. L. Mishra, Industrial Marketing Management 2021, 93, 563.
[90] WRAP, Surplus food redistribution in the UK 2015–2020,
https://wrap.org.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-06/WRAP-Surplusfood-redistribution-in-the-UK-2015-2020.pdf (accessed: October
2021).
[91] J. Midgley, in Routledge Handbook of Food Waste, 1st ed. (Eds:
C. Reynolds, T. Soma, C. Spring, J. Lazell), Routledge, London
2020.
[92] A. Stensgård, O. J. Hanssen, Food Waste in Norway 2015. Status
and Trends 2009–15 2015.
[93] Regjeringen, Intensjonsavtale om reduksjon i matsvinn,
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/e54f030bda3f488d8a29
5cd0078c4fcb/matsvinn.pdf (accessed: July 2015).
[94] Regjeringen, Industry agreement on reduction of food waste 2017.
[95] I. M. Hagen, European Company Law 2011, 8, 83.
[96] FIVH. Ja til matkastelov, 2021.
[97] Matvett. 35 klare anbefalinger fra matsvinnutvalget, 2023.
[98] J. Hultman, H. Corvellec, Environment and Planning A 2012, 44,
2413.
[99] B. Devin, C. Richards, Journal of Business Ethics 2018, 150, 199.
[100] C. W. Young, S. V. Russell, C. A. Robinson, P. K. Chintakayala, Business Strategy and the Environment 2018, 27, 1.
[101] R. Messner, C. Richards, H. Johnson, Agriculture and Human Values
2020;37.
[102] J. S. Beckmann, M. Shapiro, S. Angel, M. Eigen, UK Recommendations: Food Donation Law and Policy, The Global
Food Donation Policy Atlas, https://www.foodbanking.org/wpcontent/uploads/2021/04/UK-Recs-v2.pdf (accessed: September
2021).
[103] H. E. J. Bos-Brouwers, V. Graf, L. Aramyan, B. Oberc, Food redistribution in the EU – Mapping and analysis of existing regulatory
and policy measures impacting food redistribution from EU Member States 2020.
[104] S. Munger, Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 2018, 19,
64.
[105] J. D. Lohnes, Agriculture and Human Values, Springer, Berlin 2020.
[106] S. Franco, C. Cicatiello, Waste Manage. 2021, 121, 286.
[107] M. Eriksson, C. Malefors, P. Callewaert, H. Hartikainen, O.
Pietiläinen, I. Strid, Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 2019, 4,
100021.
[108] We thank one of the anonymous reviewers for inspiring us to think
along these lines and notice the implicit harmonization of food
waste governance across cases.
[109] D. N. Warshawsky, Cities 2015, 49, 26.

© 2024 The Author(s). Global Challenges published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

