npj | science of food

Perspective

Published in partnership with Beijing Technology and Business University

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

A novel approach to identify critical
knowledge gaps for food safety in circular
food systems
Check for updates

1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;

Stefan P. J. van Leeuwen
B. J. A. Berendsen

, A. M. Verschoor, H. J. van der Fels-Klerx

, M. G. M. van de Schans

&

The transition from linear production towards a circular agro-food system is an important step towards
increasing Europe’s sustainability. This requires re-designing the food production systems, which
inevitably comes with challenges as regards controlling the safety of our food, animals and the
ecosystem. Where in current food production systems many food safety hazards are understood and
well-managed, it is anticipated that with the transition towards circular food production systems,
known hazards may re-emerge and new hazards will appear or accumulate, leading to new -and less
understood- food safety risks. In this perspective paper, we present a simple, yet effective approach,
to identify knowledge gaps with regard to food safety in the transition to a circular food system. An
approach with ﬁve questions is proposed, derived from current food safety management approaches
like HACCP. Applying this to two cases shows that risk assessment and management should
emphasize more on the exposure to unexpected (with regards to its nature and its origin) hazards, as
hazards might circulate and accumulate in the food production system. Five knowledge gaps became
apparent: there’s a need for (1) risk assessment and management to focus more on unknown hazards
and mixtures of hazards, (2) more data on the occurrence of hazards in by-products, (3) better
understanding the fate of hazards in the circular food production system, (4) the development of
models to adequately perform risk assessments for a broad range of hazards and (5) new ways of
valorization of co-products in which a safe-by-design approach should be adopted.

Current European food production is not sustainable in the long term.
Fossil and mineral resources are depleted. Changing climate is leading to
increased drought eventson the one hand and more heavy rainfall on the
other hand. Also the ever-increasing world population leads to an
increased food demand. The transition towards a circular agro-food
system, rather than current non-circular production supply chains, is an
inevitable step towards increasing sustainability, respecting the planetary boundaries. At all stages of food production, distribution and
consumption, stakeholders such as scientists, policy makers, farmers,
food producers, consumers are re-thinking and re-designing the current
food production approaches. The European Commission has set
ambitious goals under the European Green Deal of which the New
Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP)1 and the Farm to Fork strategy2
are the main building blocks. They include the reduction of the use of

artiﬁcial fertilizers, reduction of nutrient and food losses, growth of
organic farming, water reuse, etc. At every level (farm level, food supply
chain level, consumer level) and at all scales (local, regional, global)
changes are currently taking place and many more future changes are
expected. The transition towards a circular food system is a systemic
change, and it is expected that the production of food in 10–20 years
from now will be signiﬁcantly different from current approaches.
Recently, Muscat et al.3 proposed ﬁve ecological principles (safeguard,
avoid, prioritize, recycle and entropy) to guide biomass use towards a circular bioeconomy. Considering application of these principles, severe
changes in the European food production system are to be expected and according to recent reviews4,5—these may go along with the occurrence of
potential new food safety risks. Three of these principles are likely to impact
food safety. Examples are given here.

Wageningen Food Safety Research (WFSR), Wageningen University & Research, Akkermaalsbos 2, 6708 WB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
e-mail: stefan.vanleeuwen@wur.nl

npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

1

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

Safeguard - This principle prevents the depletion of natural sources and
thus bans the use of artiﬁcial fertilizers. In combination with an expected
decreasing number of livestock in Europe, and thus availability of manure,
this results in a demand for alternative products to provide the required
nutrients for agricultural practice. These nutrients are vastly available in
products we currently consider as being waste, such as sewage sludge. Thus,
sewage sludge is an interesting candidate for future use for agricultural
application (most likely after treatment). The reintroduction of such a
product may be accompanied with the introduction of a whole range of
legacy and new chemical hazards, e.g., human pharmaceuticals, personal
care products and contaminants like heavy metals, plant protection products and persistent organic pollutants (POPs), including per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs).
Prioritize - This principle states that products should be used as high in
the food chain as possible. Thus, if a product is suited for human food, it
should be used as such and not as animal feed. As a result, lower quality
products will be available for, for instance, animal feed. The use of lower
quality products at higher levels in the food chain may pose new food safety
hazards. Furthermore, new processing techniques to upcycle co-products,
here deﬁned as by-products from production processes, might also induce
new food safety hazards.
Recycle - This principle focusses on the reuse of products in food
production that are currently being considered as waste. A clear result is that
more co-products and waste streams are recycled and introduced in e.g.,
animal feed or compost. The reintroduction of such products can yield new
food safety hazards. An example is the increased use of intra- or inter-species
of animal co-products. The use of processed animal proteins from mammals
in feed of cattle could transmit prions causing bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). Also, low concentrations of contaminants might be
reintroduced as these co-products are only to a minor extent systemically
monitored.
Evidently, new food safety challenges arise in the transition to more
circular food production. Legislation is not in all cases ﬁt-for-purpose for a
circular food production system. In some cases regulation hampers the
transition, in other cases the regulations are not fully designed to prevent
new food safety issues from occurring. Regulation 2020/7416 was implemented recently, but only focuses on measures for safe application from a
microbiological hazards point of view, but not for chemical hazards. The
main food safety risks seem to originate from the (re)introduction of low(er)
quality products or products that are currently considered waste into the
food system4,5. In this perspective paper, we present a simpliﬁed risk
assessment and management approach, based on HACCP principles,
consisting of ﬁve questions. We choose to start from the HACCP approach
since HACCP is already mostly applied in an operational setting by food and
feed stakeholders (from production to distribution). We have adopted the
HACCP approach for assessing food safety in a circular food production
system and with aiming to identify knowledge gaps therein. In addition to
feed/food producers, it can be applied by scientists/technologists designing
new circular processes, and by risk assessors/managers who wish to determine potential risks of new development in circular food & feed production.
The effectiveness of this novel approach is demonstrated based on two
currently relevant case studies related to circular food production to identify
critical knowledge gaps, highlight points of concern and assess current
barriers.
Approach
Five question approach. To asses food safety in the transition to a
circular food production system, we here propose an effective approach
that allows detection of critical knowledge gaps. This approach is based
on ﬁve aspects that need to be addressed; elements touched upon by these
ﬁve questions are also covered by the EU legislation of the General Food
Law7 and HACCP approaches. In traditional risk assessment (that come
in various approaches8,9, the main steps are (1) hazard identiﬁcation, (2)
hazard characterization, (3) exposure assessment and (4) risk characterization. These steps were the basis of the presented approach, yet
npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective

Fig. 1 | Five-step approach for safety assessment in a circular food production
system. 1: Input—determine which (waste) material or co-product is used in the
circular food production system. 2: Hazards—identify the hazards that occur in the
circular food production system. 3: Fate—determine how do these hazards move
through the circular food production system. 4: Risks—determine the risks of these
hazards in the circular food production system. 5: Acceptability—determine if the
risk is acceptable or if risk management measures need to be taken. Copyright
Bureau voor Beeldzaken, 2022.

additional attention is given to the exposure assessment. More speciﬁcally, this relates to the input of by-products in the circular system and the
behavior of the hazards in the circular food-production system. The ﬁve
questions are shown in Fig. 1.
Q1: Input deals with deﬁning the case and can involve the following
aspects: What raw materials and co-products are incorporated in the production and distribution process? Where do they come from? Here, the scale
of the process should also be considered. Does the process consider a single
farm, a region or the whole country or planet? Small scale processes can lead
to very ampliﬁed risks for a speciﬁc region. Large scale processes could
potentially harm a large group of consumers.
Q2: Hazard deals with the identiﬁcation and deﬁnition of the (un)
expected hazards: What potential hazards can be present in these raw
materials and co-products? Is legislation available? Can and will an input
control monitoring strategy be applied? Monitoring data are required to
sufﬁciently answer this question.
Hazards can be divided into three types: chemical, biological and
physical. Chemical hazards may include chemical compounds, such as
(heavy) metals, plant protection products, pharmaceuticals (for animals and humans), natural toxins (mycotoxins, plant toxins, marine
toxins), environmental contaminants (dioxins, polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), PFASs) and process contaminants (e.g., mineral oil
saturated hydrocarbons (MOSH) and mineral oil aromatic hydrocarbons (MOAH). Biological hazards include all organisms, like bacteria, and protozoa, as well as biologically active particles such as prions
and viruses, that can be harmful to human health. Physical hazards are
for instance (micro)plastics, metal particles and bone fragments, as well
as radioactive particles.
Hazards can originate from two different sources: (1) hazards that are
intentionally applied in food production (so called ‘residues’) and hazards
that (2) unintentionally (and sometimes unknowingly) are introduced into
the food system (‘contaminants’). The intentionally applied hazards include
pharmaceuticals and plant protection products. Hazards that are
2

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

Fig. 2 | The knowns and unknowns: where hazards can show up expectedly and
unexpectedly. Top-left: known hazards show up in known food/feed production
situations; top-right: in known food/feed production situations previously unknown
hazards show up; bottom-left: in previously unknown food/feed production situations
known hazards show up; bottom-right: in previously unknown food/feed production
situations previously unknown hazards show up. See text for explanation and examples.

unintendedly introduced usually originate from co-products of any sort or
environmental contamination.
The different types of hazards may have a different nature, and the level
of knowledge and regulation differs substantially. For example, ‘known’
hazards may appear in unexpected places, whereas in other cases ‘unknown’
hazards may show up in known cases. Figure 2 shows a categorization of
knowns and unknowns as regards the nature and the origin of the hazard. A
further explanation is given below.
Known hazards from known sources are numerous. These include, but
are not limited to, marine toxins in shellﬁsh, veterinary medicines in animal
co-products and plant protection products in animal feed. For known
hazards from known sources, typically appropriate risk management practices are in place. Legal maximum limits, such as laid down for example in
Commission Regulation 2023/91510 (succession of regulation EC/1881/
2006), other limits and control programs are in place and are continuously
reviewed based on the latest scientiﬁc insights.
A case of a known hazard arising from an unknown source as a result of
recycling was the case of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) scandal in the
early 2000s. A glycose containing co-product originating from the manufacturing of birth-control medication was used in pig feed. In a large number
of pigs infertility was diagnosed. Only then it was found that the animal feed
contained high concentrations of MPA, a substance that is banned in
Europe for animal treatment. Thousands of animals were destructed11. For
this case, one could advocate that the co-product was per deﬁnition a highrisk product that had been introduced into the food system.
An example of an unknown hazard originating from a known source is
well illustrated by the case of mineral oil saturated hydrocarbons (MOSH)
and mineral oil aromatic hydrocarbons (MOAH) in recycled paper and
carton board used as food contact material. Although it is known that
(recycled) food contact materials may contain certain contaminants12, the
presence of MOSH/MOAH in recycled paper and carton board was long
neglected. This issue was discovered already in the early 2010s13,14, but it was
propelled only after a non-governmental organization (NGO) brought this
to greater public attention. This resulted in several measures at the food
producer side and authorities to adequately identify and manage risks,
ultimately leading to reduction of the dietary exposure to these
contaminants.
npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective
The most intriguing category is the category with unknown hazards in
a yet unknown situation. An example of such a case evolved from 2006
onwards in Germany, where the application of per- and polyﬂuoralkyl
substances (PFAS) polluted soil conditioners led to a widespread PFAS
contamination in the catchment areas of the rivers Moehne and UpperRuhr. By that time, there was only little known about the hazards of PFASs
(unknown hazard), and the occurrence in soil conditioners (unknown
situation), which resulted in an uncontrolled pollution event. Because of the
uncertainty, drastic measures were implemented to reduce undesirable
human exposure of citizens in the impacted area. Later, a similar event
occurred in the south of Germany (Rastatt area)15–17.
Q3: Fate deals with the translocation and persistence of the food safety
hazards. For the translocation it involves the following aspects: Do the
hazards stay in the compartment (e.g., animal, soil, crop, water) they are
introduced into or do they move among compartments? If so, to which
compartments? It is important to understand how hazards move among
compartments from a mechanistic point of view. The fate of a hazard
depends on speciﬁc circumstances, including the properties of the contaminant and the environment the contaminant is in. For instance, the
transmission of contaminants from soil to water depends on the soil
composition, but also on the type of contaminant itselve18.
Regarding the persistence: are the hazards degraded to a no-effect
concentration by the system (natural mitigation) or are they persistent, or
transformed to other bioactive hazards? In an ideal situation, a hazard is
mitigated by the system itself, e.g., a substance is degraded/deactivated in
soil. The persistence of a hazard should be known as it is an important
parameter in understanding the fate. Persistent hazards, e.g., DDT or
microplastics, remain in the system and might accumulate. If these hazards
currently show no negative effects, they may do so in time, whether that is in
ﬁve or 100 years from now. Data need to be obtained and should be made
publicly available to allow a meaningful risk assessment. Note that degradation of, for instance, a chemical hazard can result in the transformation of
the hazard, still (or even more) exerting a negative effect. An example is
estradiol, a female hormone, that can be transformed in soil to the transformation product estrone, a more estrogenic substance19. Wastewater
treatment may also result in other transformation products that show (eco)
toxicological potential20–22. Note that some hazards can exert an acute risk
(e.g., allergens in food products) and as such their degree of persistence is
subordinate.
Q4: Risk assessment deals with the quantiﬁcation or estimation of the
risk and involves questions such as: Do the hazards yield a potential risk (one
health perspective) in the compartments they can occur in? Risk studies
cannot be carried out for all hazards, in all compartments for all possible
toxicological endpoints. Therefore, it is important to understand which
hazards can be present in which compartment. As such, risk studies should
focus on speciﬁc hazards in speciﬁc compartments for speciﬁc endpoints.
To complicate risk assessment, especially in a circular food production
system, combinations of hazards can occur, which need speciﬁc attention.
Q5: Risk management deals with all the aspects of risk management,
and involves questions like: Are such potential risks permissible (from a
policy and consumer perspective) and can such potential risks be actively
mitigated, preferably at the source? Here also the potential interaction
among hazards needs to be considered, e.g., how the exposure to chemical
contaminants can result in a higher impact of a microbial infection.
Application and knowledge gaps
To get a better understanding of the complexity of the topic and to identify
knowledge gaps using the presented approach, the approach is applied to
two different cases with a focus on unknown and known biological and
chemical hazards.
Case 1: Former foodstuffs to animal feed
Instead of going to waste, former foodstuffs are increasingly being utilized in
animal feed. In the EU, annually 5 million tonnes of former foodstuffs are
already being used for feed23. Until now, products of primarily plant origin
3

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

are being valorized at a large scale into animal feed. The foodstuffs that are
currently being used are products that in principle are/were also suitable for
human consumption, but may not be sold as such (anymore), such as
cutting remains, leftovers from product development, products over expiry
date, or other products that do not meet the quality standards established.
Collection and conversion of former foodstuffs into feed is in Europe
coordinated by a few large processing companies, having dedicated suppliers, that process these products into feed products. These processes are
now restricted to relatively safe former foodstuffs originating from bakeries
and confectionery factories but from a sustainability point of view, as well as
in order to address the growing need for proteins, reuse of foodstuffs of
animal origin, such as milk, eggs, and meat that for some reason are not
suitable (anymore) for human consumption (e.g., because of commercial
reasons, quality, production failures etc.), should be considered in addition
to the current plant-based materials.
Strict EU legislation for the use of animal proteins as animal feed is in
place since the start of the 21st century in order to gain control over the
spread of BSE as well as the spread of certain contagious animal diseases in
Europe. These include three types of restrictions being: (a) the ruminant ban
(protein of ruminants is not allowed for use as feed), (b) the extended feed
ban (animal proteins may not be used in several other applications), and (c)
the species to species ban (anti-cannibalism; proteins from one species may
not be fed to the same species). Though some exemptions are in place, these
regulations to a large extent hamper the use of animal derived proteins as
animal feed. About twenty years later, the European Commission is considering some a relaxation of the extended feed ban to enable a more circular
production system. Since August 2021, processed pig proteins are allowed to
be used as chicken feed, and processed chicken proteins are allowed for use
in pig feed, and eight insect species are currently allowed for inclusion in
animal feed (EC 2021/1372)24.
A further relaxation could be to allow using so-called swill (kitchen
refuse/waste) in feed. These waste streams are generated in every household,
but for logistical reasons, only (larger) kitchens and caterers are considered
realistic sources. The approach with the ﬁve questions will help to identify
the threats and opportunities.
Q1: Input: Former foodstuffs, particularly swill (kitchen refuse/waste)
for animal feed. Primary source for these waste streams are (larger) restaurants and caterers. Collection and processing will typically be organized
at a local or regional scale.
Q2: Hazard: The primary hazards associated with swill are biologically
active particles (prions; BSE/TSE) and pathogens/zoonoses (e.g., foot and
mouth disease, Aujeszky’s disease, African swine ﬂu)25,26. Swill not only has
the risk of transmitting animal diseases, but also diseases that eventually can
affect human beings, such as Creutzfeld-Jacob disease, a rare spongiform
encephalitis (brain disease), suspected to be caused by consumption of BSEinfected beef. For these reasons, current EU legislation does not allow
inclusion of swill in animal feed27. Also for that reason monitoring programs
for forbidden anima proteins in animal feed are in place.
Q3: Fate: The reuse of swill bears the risk of introducing novel hazards
into the animal production chain26,28. Such hazards may circulate and/or
accumulate in the food system. Viruses and prions may be re-introduced via
swill and may spread among animals and transfer from animals to humans.
Particularly prions are notoriously resistant to digestive enzymes, heat,
disinfectants and desiccation and strongly bind to solids such as feed or soil
particles. Bound to particles, prions can stay infectious for many years and
may as such remain present as a hazard in the system. Lack of proper
removal mechanisms may even lead to accumulation in the food chain.
Q4: Risk: Due to the variety of sources and processing options, a true
risk assessment can only be performed on a case-by-case basis. It is obvious
that animal proteins within swill currently bear unacceptable risks. A
complicating factor here is that in many current kitchen and catering
practices, all swill (both plant and animal based) is disposed as mixed waste.
This means that the mixture carries a larger risk than some of its individual
constituents would. For example, fruit and vegetable waste, which commonly is the largest part of swill, bears zero-risk for transmitting animalnpj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective
related biological hazards. However, from a precautionary principle, once in
a mixture with more hazardous animal waste, the whole mixture should be
treated as high risk material. Would plant-based swill be collected separately, this would be easier to reuse in animal feed and human foods.
Q5: Risk management: The current ban on swill application in animal
feed has been a very effective measure to reduce possible health risks to a
minimum. However, in view of the current ambition to reduce food waste
and close production loops, other options to utilize swill should be explored.
This calls for adequate risk governance approaches.
Knowledge gaps. This case relates to a known hazard in a known
situation (Q2, Fig. 2). The application of our proposed approach reveals that
current legislation is effective in reducing risks to an absolute minimum. For
animal proteins, legislation has proven to be effective: between 2005 and
2015 about 73,000,000 cattle were tested for BSE in the EU, and in this
period the number of reported cases dropped from 554 cases in 2005 to just
two in 201529.
However, current EU legislation hampers the further utilization of
former foodstuffs such as swill on a larger scale. From a food security point
of view, alternative options should be investigated.
Relaxation of the established feed bans should therefore be accompanied by case-based risk assessments performed on extensive scientiﬁc
basis, as has been done prior to the most recent partial lift of the extended
feed ban30. Such an approach should enable to make informed decisions on
acceptable risks, although this can only be done for known hazards and
known sources.
We conclude that, for the case of the reintroduction of swill into the
food production chain, knowledge gaps are mainly related to risk management (Q5). Reducing potential risks of swill starts with better separation
at the source. A promising start could be to explore the options of relatively
clean streams within the catering waste.
As evident from the difﬁculties involved with mixed waste streams
mentioned before, separation of swill into fractions with higher (e.g., meat,
bones) or lower risks (e.g., fruit & vegetables, fries, bread) could be an option
to manage these risks more precisely. It is not clear yet to what extent such a
separation can be achieved in practice. The practical issues regarding
separation and collection should be further explored.
Another step would be the investigation of the most promising routes
towards valorization, such as to allow its use for certain dedicated purposes
such as feeding it to particular animals (including insects), conversion into
microbial proteins (fermentation) or breakdown into valuable components
(bioreﬁnery).
Case 2: Water reuse as a water source in irrigation in agriculture
Wastewater products comprise a suite of materials originating from urban
and industrial wastewater treatment plants (WWTP). Urban and industrial
wastewater is, next to being a waste stream, also a valuable source of fresh
water and nutrients. When mentioning wastewater here, we also consider
gray water and excreta31. The European Commission (EC) aims at
increasing the reuse of treated wastewater from a current 3% to 15% in a
couple of years32 in order to battle freshwater shortages. Wastewater mining
deals with the reuse of wastewater products, e.g., reclaimed water, sludge,
struvite and other materials which are valuable products thereof. Agriculture is an important (future) recipient of wastewater products for the
purpose of irrigation and fertilization. Countries and regions like the state of
California, Spain and Israel are lacking sufﬁcient resources of freshwater
already and face drought issues frequently or even (semi)continuously. They
have turned to reclaimed water for irrigation of lawns and public gardens
(California) or agricultural production ﬁelds (e.g., Spain, Israel). Wastewater
is known to be vulnerable to contain various pathogens and chemical
hazards, and these may comprise risks when agricultural reuse is considered.
The safe reuse of reclaimed water for agricultural irrigation from a microbiological hazards point of view was recently regulated6,33. Here, we limit the
assessment to the chemical hazards of wastewater reuse. Considering its
nature, a plethora of chemical compounds occur in wastewater8,34,35,
sometimes referred to as contaminants of emerging concern (CEC). These
4

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

include pharmaceutical products (e.g., pain relievers, blood pressure medications, anticonvulsant medication, antibiotics), personal care products
(e.g., detergents like quaternary ammonium compounds and musk fragrances like galaxolide), coloring agents from textiles (e.g., indigo dyes),
industrial products (e.g., PFASs), plant protection products and household
chemicals. These contaminants, when present in reclaimed water, may
present potential hazards when applied in agriculture for irrigation. In this
respect, it may compromise the safety of food products. Some studies have
demonstrated the uptake and deposition of contaminants from reclaimed
water into crops, such as residues of pharmaceuticals in vegetables36–38 and
PFAS in plants39,40. One may perceive that the occurrence of such contaminants would a priori rule out the use of reclaimed water. But given the
intrinsic value in terms of water and nutrients, it is crucial to investigate if,
and how reclaimed water can be applied in agriculture providing safe
foods.Recently published legislation and guidelines6,33 provides criteria for
application of reclaimed water. However, these criteria focus primarily
microbiological hazards, although it is acknowledged that large knowledge
gaps exist on the risk of CECs in agricultural produce.
The ﬁve question approach is posed for the case of water reuse using
reclaimed water for irrigation purposes to identify critical knowledge gaps.
However, as the number and variety of hazards in this case is very large, this
cannot be done in brief. Furthermore, for many hazards insufﬁcient data are
currently available for an adequate assessment. To demonstrate the
applicability of the presented approach, we limited the scope of this case to
the potential presence of PFAS in wastewater. Though, note that this only
covers a small part of the potential risks.
Q1: Input: The aim is to increase the use of reclaimed water from
domestic origin for irrigation on a global scale. Currently reclaimed water is
applied for irrigation in speciﬁc countries41, but not yet on a global scale.
Q2: Hazard: Many different microbiological, pathogenic or chemical hazards can be present in (treated) wastewater. Some are known
and others are unexpected and unknown. Even though the unexpected
hazards need consideration, here we focus on a known one. Therefore,
the focus is on chemical hazards only, and speciﬁcally on PFASs. This
group of chemicals contains over thousands of substances of which,
according to current knowledge, a limited number, including perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctanoic sulfonate (PFOS),
are considered the most relevant.
Q3: Fate: Some studies investigated the fate of PFASs in WWTP
water42,43. Current wastewater treatment is insufﬁciently effective for complete removal of PFASs. Consequently, PFASs remain in the reclaimedwater. When applying this water on agricultural land, the PFASs will be in
direct contact with the crops and/or be mixed with the topsoil. Depending
on the PFASs characteristics and soil composition, the PFASs can (1) adsorb
to soil, immobilizing the PFAS44, (2) leach to surface and/or ground
water45,46, (3) run-off or leach in a rainfall event or (4) be taken up by
crops39,40. Currently the extent to which they might be taken up by crops is
not well understood but this process clearly depends on the physicochemical characteristics of the PFASs, on the soil characteristics and on the
crop species and/or variety39,40. When taken up by crops, the PFASs may end
up in animal feed or human food. Also, PFASs that leach to surface water
might, depending on their physical-chemical properties, accumulate in
ﬁsh47, through which humans can be exposed. Currently, data and models to
predict the fate of the individual PFASs after land application are not
available. Especially the perﬂuoroalkyl carboxylic acids and perﬂuoroalkyl
sulfonic acids (e.g., PFOS and PFOA) are known to be very persistent. They
will not degrade under natural conditions and as such accumulate in soils
and foods. Furthermore, a recent study showed that PFASs precursors, e.g.,
8:2 ﬂuorotelomer sulfonic acid, can partly be transformed to legacy PFASs
like PFOA during wastewater treatment adding to the PFASs burden.
Q4: Risk: PFASs are deemed to exert a negative health effect at extremely low concentrations. The current state of knowledge is that several
PFASs have, among other health effects, a negative effect on the immune
system48, and current human dietary exposures in the EU lead to unacceptable risks48. This implies that the exposure to PFAS could result in an
npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective
increased susceptibility for microbial infections in animals and humans.
Effects of PFASs on soil and aquatic life ecosystems are vastly unknown.
Q5: Risk management: With the current knowledge, developing risk
management, including elements like risk mitigation and risk monitoring is
sensible to do. Mitigation can be of technological or regulatory nature.
Knowledge gaps. This case is related to a mostly known hazard in an
unknown situation (Q2, Fig. 2), when speciﬁcally scoped to PFASs. However, in a broader perspective, it relates to unknown hazards in an unknown
situation (Fig. 2) as the nature of all relevant PFASs when reusing wastewater in food production is currently not well understood.
As regards the current regulatory tools, guidelines on minimum
requirements for water reuse were recently adopted6,33, setting uniform
minimum water quality requirements for the safe reuse of reclaimed water
in agricultural irrigation. However, these guidelines particularly deal with a
safe application of wastewater with a focus on viral and microbiological
risks. Some directions are given on how to assess fate and risks of contaminants, though in a generic manner. On the other hand, the current food
safety legislation setting maximum limits (MLs) (e.g., 2023/915) only
describes known chemicals in known situations and is therefore not equipped to handle new contaminants in unknown situations. Some reports have
indicated no or little risk is to be expected in their ﬁeld cases studied36,49,50,
which is promising. However, this is far from a comprehensive understanding of risks in the diversity of crops, diversity of reclaimed water and
diversity of agricultural production approaches. There is thus a need for a
regulatory framework that supports a safe application of reclaimed water
that also addresses chemical contaminants.
From the application of the ﬁve question approach, for a safe application of reclaimed water in food production, several knowledge gaps exist.
These are related to the hazard (Q2), the fate (Q3), the risk (Q4) and the risk
management (Q5).
With regard to the hazard identiﬁcation (Q2), the knowledge gaps
include the nature (identity) of contaminants in wastewater and the variation of contaminant levels (seasonal, batch-to-batch and between WWTPs).
In this regard several studies reported on the identity and concentration
levels of PFAS and other contaminants in (treated) wastewater51–53, but a
substantial and systematic knowledge base is lacking. For many chemicals
and physical hazards, only scarce information is currently available, particularly on reclaimed water intended for agricultural use.
With regards to the fate (Q3), knowledge gaps relate to the
transmission of hazards among compartments, for example, to soil,
crops and food or feed, taking into account the variation of these
compartments (e.g., soil composition). For many hazards, current
knowledge on the persistence and transmission of contaminants among
compartments (e.g., mobility), is limited. Since it is not possible to study
the fate of all chemicals in all circumstances, the ultimate aim is to derive
models that allow to estimate the persistence and transfer to different
compartments in different scenarios. When such a knowledge base is
available, stakeholders can make relevant choices as towards what
wastewater products can be used for what crops, and can rank the most
urgent risks. This prioritization is urgently required to study the actual
risk of hazards for humans, animals and the ecosystem upon exposure
to the relevant concentrations of the hazards.
When considering PFAS, with regard to the risk (Q4) only limited
information is available. Some studies demonstrate a negative effect on the
human immune system, but these studies focused on PFOA and PFOS only.
No or very limited information is available on all other PFAS which hampers
the implementation of effective legislation. Furthermore, consequential
risks, like a higher susceptibility for a microbial infection, are unknown.
In addition, technological developments are needed that support the
removal of contaminants from wastewater products (Q5), or preferably,
prevent contaminants from being disposed into wastewater. Another
mitigation strategy is the monitoring of reclaimed water prior to application,
preferably by a simple and on-site applicable methodology. To what degree
these, and potentially other mitigation strategies, are cost effective remains
to be determined.
5

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

A way forward
Food systems reaching the planetary boundaries have led to the emergence
of ambitious plans for reducing the impact on the planet. Circularity in food
production can contribute substantially to achieving these goals. The
transition to more sustainable food production is urgent. When it comes to
circularity in food production, food safety is a prerequisite for societal
acceptance of these processes. In the above described two cases, we highlight
that there are several knowledge gaps, technical challenges and regulatory
hurdles, or lacking regulations, that need to be resolved. Hurdles may
counteract a timely transition to a more circular food production. Here we
discuss possible solutions to this. A major challenge lies in the speed of
transition versus careful and safe adaptation of processes. The discussion is
particularly focused on possible solutions that enable a timely transition.
This boils down to collecting relevant information, but also simplifying ways
to characterize hazards, fate and risks.
As regards input (Q1), a better understanding is needed of the sources
of co-products that can be valorized into food and feed production (case 1).
Also information on composition, quality and safety of co-products and
waste products is needed. This will facilitate a better direction towards a
point of use in the food production chain. In that respect, a separated
collection at the source will also enable a more speciﬁc use (directly utilizable, or after a bioreﬁning step). Where current regulations prohibit use of
such co-products (e.g., in the case of swill), the leverage of such regulation
may stimulate the valorization of such products, once it has become clear
that these streams can be used in a safe way. Monitoring of co-products for a
wide range of known hazards is urgently needed. As regards case 2, a better
understanding is needed of the wastewater products that may, after treatment, be used for irrigation or fertilization purposes.
As regards hazards (Q2), the current system for determining chemical
hazards is mostly based on a substance-by-substance basis. The way forward
here is in multiple directions. Chemical hazards should be regarded in the
mixtures as they are relevant for exposure. Moreover, the rise of strong
analytical measurement methodologies (e.g., high resolution mass spectrometry) demonstrate that exposure to a plethora of contaminants,
degradation products and metabolites takes place simultaneously. Determination of all individual chemical, biological and physical hazards is
unrealistic as it is resource and time-consuming. Prioritization of hazard
analysis is required to move forward, as well as multi analytical techniques
that can determine a range of contaminants in a sample at the time. The lack
of pure chemical standards further complicates this situation. Therefore
strategies like read-across, in-silico hazard determination and in-vitro
hazard determination need to become accepted methodologies, also from a
regulatory point of view54–56.
Concerning fate (Q3), there is a need to understand the circular food
production systems as a whole. Lipophilic contaminants (e.g., dioxins) will
follow the ﬂow of the lipids in a food system, which allows for quick
assessments where potential contaminants accumulate in a food system. It
becomes more complex with chemical hazards which are intermediately
lipophilic or water soluble and mobile, as these may end up in various
compartments in the food chain and ecosystem. There is a clear need for a
quick and easy assessment of the fate and persistence of contaminants
(including uptake by crops, insects and animals), based on models that
describe the relevant food production chains and compartments. Such
models allow a quick assessment of the fate of the hazard in a temporal and
spatial fashion. It is important to appreciate data on microbial, enzymatic,
chemical and physical degradation as it may relieve possible hazards. In case
more quantitative data are needed, such data should be gathered through
dedicated experiments. The availability of powerful analytical techniques
provides a wealth of data on the occurrence of known and unknown
compounds (e.g., non-target screening & identiﬁcation), and this can
accelerate our understanding of the fate of contaminants. A generic model
approach allows for an initial assessment of the fate, even when no identity
or hazard of a substance has been assessed.
As regards risks (Q4), risk assessment has traditionally been based on a
substance-by-substance basis. Given the large number of contaminants
npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective
(e.g., PFASs), degradation products and metabolites, this calls for different
approaches that integrate multiple contaminants at the same time, e.g., by
looking at the adverse effect of groups of contaminants (mixture toxicity), by
looking at certain physical-chemical properties of the compound(s)
(quantitative structure-activity relationship = QSAR) or simply by taking
representative marker contaminants that represent a complete class of
compounds. New assessment methods (NAMs) may provide possibilities to
assess larger numbers of contaminants at the same time. However, taking
such approaches will lead to a higher level of uncertainty in the estimated
risk, than the traditional substance-by-substance approach. In many cases, it
is likely that there is sufﬁcient margin to guarantee safety. In other cases, a
need will emerge to reduce the uncertainty to get a more accurate estimation
of the risk.
Risk management (Q5) is a very broad topic, that deals with development of food safety risk mitigation measures, monitoring, compliance
testing etc. It is out of the scope of this paper to extensively discuss possible
solutions. Brieﬂy, regulations that have come into force in the past to protect
consumers now hamper progress of the timely transition towards sustainable food production (case 1). On the other hand, a lack of a clear regulatory
framework may hamper adaptation of new practices. For example, the lack
of directions on how to deal with speciﬁcally chemical contaminants in
reclaimed water (case 2) in relation to food safety when used for irrigation
may prevent such water reuse. Furthermore, the transition to a circular food
production system would beneﬁt from cross-cutting approaches between
different types of legislation including environmental, food safety, agricultural and health regulations. Such horizontal approaches should be based
on quality protocols which set out ‘end of waste’ criteria for production as is
now proposed in the revision of the Waste Framework Directive57.
Acknowledging the fact that regulations cannot be changed overnight,
and that many stakeholders rely on current regulations, we pledge for reevaluation of the food safety regulatory framework. Apart from regulatory
aspects, there is also the aspect of acceptable risk: how much risk is acceptable for the stakeholders and society? There are promising methods and
metrics to compare risks of various types, such as disability-adjusted life
years (DALY)58. These approaches may help in the overall evaluation and
comparison of different food safety scenarios. The discussion above focused
on options to remove barriers for a speedy transition. Other viewpoints may
also be relevant in the discussion. In the end it is part of the policy making
process to balance these viewpoints.
Concluding remarks
The transition towards a circular agro-food system is an important contributor to improve the sustainability of our food production system. How
can we prevent the use of agrochemicals (e.g., plant protection products and
veterinary drugs) in food production? And if these are required, how do we
prevent accumulation and re-circulation of such contaminants in the ecosystem affecting aquatic and terrestrial biota health and soil health? Can
biomass that was previously not applied for human food or animal feed be
used as such without introducing a health hazard? And does the use of
alternative sources or the reintroduction of co-products also reintroduce
unwanted contaminants into the system? And can they accumulate? These
are important safety-related aspects that must be considered in the current
transition towards circular food production systems. These considerations
help to prevent new safety related health risks, but they also contribute to the
innovative and safe application of currently undervalued co-products, such
as sewage sludge, swill and reclaimed water.
In current food production systems many food safety hazards are
understood and controlled. It is anticipated that new hazards will appear or
accumulate, leading to new -and less understood- food safety risks in the
circular food production system. The current system of identiﬁcation of
hazards and the management thereof is not well-designed to support the fast
transition to circular food production systems, that are expected to come
rapidly over the next 5–15 years. Arriving at consensus if a certain contaminant is hazardous, and designing appropriate risk management measures may take 5–15 years of scientiﬁc, societal and political debate and
6

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y

assessment. Given the number of (potential) pathogens and chemicals of
commerce, this is unacceptably long. We believe there should be a balance
between a speedy transition and the safety of our food systems. Risk
‘acceptance’ (part of Q5) is, therefore, extremely relevant.
To assess, guide and accelerate the safety assessment of circular food
production processes, a simple approach consisting of ﬁve questions is
presented, complementing the generally accepted HACCP system. We pose
that, even though the questions are straightforward, they are currently
difﬁcult to answer in many cases because we lack the knowledge to do so.
Using this approach, we have identiﬁed knowledge gaps and regulatory
hurdles that need to be resolved. In the transition to a circular economy, risk
assessment and management should emphasize more on the exposure to
unexpected (with regard to its nature and its origin) and mixtures of
hazards, as hazards might circulate and accumulate in the food production
system. Also we observe that more data on the occurrence and fate of
hazards and the development of models are required to adequately perform
risk assessment in a circular food production system. Last, new ways of
valorisation of co-products are required in which a safe-by-design approach
should be adopted.
Received: 6 December 2023; Accepted: 28 March 2024;

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

EC. Circular economy action plan, https://environment.ec.europa.eu/
strategy/circular-economy-action-plan_en (2023).
EC. Farm to Fork strategy, https://food.ec.europa.eu/horizontaltopics/farm-fork-strategy_en (2023).
Muscat, A. et al. Principles, drivers and opportunities of a circular
bioeconomy. Nat. Food 2, 561–566 (2021).
Focker, M. et al. Review of food safety hazards in circular food
systems in Europe. Food Res. Int. 158, 111505 (2022).
van Asselt, E. D. et al. Chemical food safety hazards in circular food
systems: a review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 63, 10319–10331 (2023).
EC. Regulation (EU) 2020/741 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 25 May 2020 on minimum requirements for water reuse.
Off. J. Eur. Union L177, L177/132-155 (2020).
EC. Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and
requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety
Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety. Off. J.
Eur. Union L31, 1–24 (2002).
US-EPA. CompTox Chemicals Dashboard v2.2, https://comptox.epa.
gov/dashboard/search-results?input_type=consumer_
product&inputs=CPCat%20Use%20Category%3Awastewater
EFSA. The four Steps of Risk Assessment, https://multimedia.efsa.
europa.eu/riskassessment/index.htm (2024).
Commission, E. Commission Regulation (EU) 2023/915 of 25 April
2023 on maximum levels for certain contaminants in food and
repealing Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006. Off. J. Eur. Union
103–111 (2023).
Independent. Hormone slip costs 50,000 pigs’ lives, https://www.
independent.ie/world-news/europe/hormone-slip-costs-50000pigs-lives-26042661.html (2002).
Peters, R. J. B. et al. Review of analytical approaches for the
identiﬁcation of non-intentionally added substances in paper and
board food contact materials. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 85,
44–54 (2019).
Biedermann, M., Uematsu, Y. & Grob, K. Mineral oil contents in paper
and board recycled to paperboard for food packaging. Packag.
Technol. Sci. 24, 61–73 (2011).
Lorenzini, R. et al. Migration kinetics of mineral oil hydrocarbons from
recycled paperboard to dry food: monitoring of two real cases. Food
Addit. Contam A Chem. Anal. Control Expo. Risk Assess. 30,
760–770 (2013).

npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

Perspective
15. Evangelou, M. W. H. & Robinson, B. H. The phytomanagement of
PFAS-contaminated land. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 19,
6817 (2022).
16. Wilhelm, M., Kraft, M., Rauchfuss, K. & Hölzer, J. Assessment and
management of the ﬁrst German case of a contamination with
perﬂuorinated compounds (PFC) in the region Sauerland, North
Rhine-Westphalia. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 71, 725–733 (2008).
17. Skutlarek, D., Exner, M. & Färber, H. Perﬂuorinated surfactants in
surface and drinking waters. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 13,
299–307 (2006).
18. Berendsen, B. J. A. et al. A strategy to determine the fate of active
chemical compounds in soil; applied to antimicrobially active
substances. Chemosphere 279, 130495 (2021).
19. Goeppert, N., Dror, I. & Berkowitz, B. Detection, fate and transport
of estrogen family hormones in soil. Chemosphere 95,
336–345 (2014).
20. Anand, U. et al. Occurrence, transformation, bioaccumulation, risk
and analysis of pharmaceutical and personal care products from
wastewater: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 20, 3883–3904 (2022).
21. Meng, Y. et al. A review on analytical methods for pharmaceutical and
personal care products and their transformation products. J. Environ.
Sci. 101, 260–281 (2021).
22. Singh, A. et al. Oxidative treatment of micropollutants present in
wastewater: A special emphasis on transformation products, their
toxicity, detection, and ﬁeld-scale investigations. J. Environ. Manag.
354, 120339 (2024).
23. EFFPA. 5 Million tonnes processed annually, https://www.effpa.eu/
(2019).
24. EC. Commission Regulation (EU) 2021/1372 of 17 August 2021
amending Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 999/2001 of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards the prohibition
to feed non-ruminant farmed animals, other than fur animals, with
protein derived from animals (Text with EEA relevance). Off. J. Eur.
Union (2021).
25. Houston, F. & Andréoletti, O. Animal prion diseases: the risks to
human health. Brain Pathol. 29, 248–262 (2019).
26. Dame-Korevaar, A., Boumans, I., Antonis, A., van Klink, E. & De Olde,
E. Microbial health hazards of recycling food waste as animal feed.
Future Foods 4, 100062 (2021).
27. EC. Regulation (EC) No 999/2001 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 22 May 2001 laying down rules for the prevention,
control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies. Off. J. Eur. Union L147, 1–40 (2001).
28. Boumans, I. J. M. M. et al. Feeding food losses and waste to pigs and
poultry: Implications for feed quality and production. J. Clean. Prod.
378, 134623 (2022).
29. EFSA. Scientists investigate origin of isolated BSE cases, https://
www.efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/170713 (2017).
30. EFSA. Updated quantitative risk assessment (QRA) of the BSE
riskposed by processed animal protein (PAP). EFSA J. 16, https://doi.
org/10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5314 (2018).
31. WHO. Guidelines for the safe use of wastewater, excreta and
greywater - Volume 4. (World Health Organization- United Nations
Environment Programme, 2013).
32. EC. Water Reuse, https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/reuse.htm
(2023).
33. EC. Commission notice - Guidelines to support the application of
Regulation 2020/741 on minimum requirements for water reuse
(2022/C 298/01). Off. J. Eur. Union C298, 1–55 (2022).
34. Alcalde Sanz, L. & Gawlik, B. Minimum quality requirements for water
reuse in agricultural irrigation and aquifer recharge - Towards a water
reuse regulatory instrument at EU level. (European Commission, Joint
Research Centre, Luxemburg, 2017).
35. Williams, A. J. et al. The CompTox Chemistry Dashboard: a community
data resource for environmental chemistry. J. Cheminform. 9, 61 (2017).

7

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-024-00265-y
36. Ben Mordechay, E., Mordehay, V., Tarchitzky, J. & Chefetz, B.
Pharmaceuticals in edible crops irrigated with reclaimed wastewater:
evidence from a large survey in Israel. J. Hazard. Mater. 416,
126184 (2021).
37. Riemenschneider, C. et al. Pharmaceuticals, their metabolites, and
other polar pollutants in ﬁeld-grown vegetables irrigated with treated
municipal wastewater. J. Agric. Food Chem. 64, 5784–5792 (2016).
38. Chitescu, C. L., Nicolau, A. I. & Stolker, A. A. M. Uptake of
oxytetracycline, sulfamethoxazole and ketoconazole from fertilised
soils by plants. Food Addit. Contam. A 30, 1138–1146 (2013).
39. Ghisi, R., Vamerali, T. & Manzetti, S. Accumulation of perﬂuorinated
alkyl substances (PFAS) in agricultural plants: a review. Environ. Res.
169, 326–341 (2019).
40. Lesmeister, L. et al. Extending the knowledge about PFAS
bioaccumulation factors for agricultural plants—a review. Sci. Total
Environ. 766, 142640 (2021).
41. Drechsel, P., Qadir, M. & Galibourg, D. The WHO Guidelines for safe
wastewater use in agriculture: a review of implementation challenges
and possible solutions in the Global South. Water 14, 864 (2022).
42. Coggan, T. L. et al. An investigation into per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in nineteen Australian wastewater treatment
plants (WWTPs). Heliyon 5, e02316 (2019).
43. Chen, W. et al. Occurrence, fate and risk assessment of per- and
polyﬂuoroalkyl substances in wastewater treatment plants in Shaanxi,
China. Environ. Pollut. 314, 120226 (2022).
44. Brusseau, M. L. Assessing the potential contributions of additional
retention processes to PFAS retardation in the subsurface. Sci. Total
Environ. 613-614, 176–185 (2018).
45. Johnson, G. R. PFAS in soil and groundwater following historical land
application of biosolids. Water Res. 211, 118035 (2022).
46. Pepper, I., Kelley, C. & Brusseau, M. Is PFAS from land applied
municipal biosolids a signiﬁcant source of human exposure via
groundwater? Sci. Total Environ. 864, 161154 (2023).
47. Zafeiraki, E. et al. Occurrence of perﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in
a large number of wild and farmed aquatic animals collected in the
Netherlands. Chemosphere 232, 415–423 (2019).
48. EFSA. Risk to human health related to the presence of perﬂuoroalkyl
substances in food. EFSA J. 18, https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2020.
6223 (2020).
49. Ben Mordechay, E. et al. Wastewater-derived organic contaminants in
fresh produce: dietary exposure and human health concerns. Water
Res. 223, 118986 (2022).
50. Martínez-Piernas, A. B., Plaza-Bolaños, P., Fernández-Ibáñez, P. &
Agüera, A. Organic microcontaminants in tomato crops irrigated with
reclaimed water grown under ﬁeld conditions: occurrence, uptake, and
health risk assessment. J. Agric. Food Chem. 67, 6930–6939 (2019).
51. Golovko, O. et al. Occurrence and removal of chemicals of emerging
concern in wastewater treatment plants and their impact on receiving
water systems. Sci. Total Environ. 754, 142122 (2021).
52. Tavasoli, E., Luek, J. L., Malley, J. P. & Mouser, P. J. Distribution and
fate of per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in wastewater
treatment facilities. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 23, 903–913
(2021).
53. Thompson, K. A. et al. Poly- and perﬂuoroalkyl substances in
municipal wastewater treatment plants in the United States: seasonal
patterns and meta-analysis of long-term trends and average
concentrations. ACS EST Water 2, 690–700 (2022).

npj Science of Food | (2024)8:34

54. Krewski, D. et al. Toxicity testing in the 21st century: a vision and a
strategy. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health B Crit. Rev. 13, 51–138 (2010).
55. Patlewicz, G. & Fitzpatrick, J. M. Current and future perspectives on
the development, evaluation, and application of in silico approaches
for predicting toxicity. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 29, 438–451 (2016).
56. Patlewicz, G. et al. A chemical category-based prioritization approach
for selecting 75 per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS) for tiered
toxicity and toxicokinetic testing. Environ. Health Perspect. 127,
14501 (2019).
57. EC. Proposal for a targeted revision of the Waste Framework Directive,
https://environment.ec.europa.eu/publications/proposal-targetedrevision-waste-framework-directive_en (2023).
58. WHO. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), https://www.who.int/
data/gho/indicator-metadata-registry/imr-details/158 (2023).

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding of this research from the
strategic funding from the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food
Quality (KB‐34‐004‐011 (1D‐2), KB-37-002-038 and KB-40-003-001).

Author contributions
S.v.L.: funding acquisition, conceptualization, writing, editing; A.V., H.v.d.F.K., M.v.d.S., B.B.: conceptualisation, writing, editing.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interest.
H.v.d.F.-K. is Guest Editor of the “Sustainability and the circular economy:
The impact on food safety” collection at Npj Science of Food. H.v.d.F.-K.
was not involved in the journal’s review of, or decisions related to, this
manuscript.

Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Stefan P. J. van Leeuwen.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024

8

